<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		<title>How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-17</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
		<link href="css/eBook_CSS_November2016.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-17" lang="en-GB" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<div>
			<p id="_idParaDest-17" class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_00-Chapter-title---TOC-Level-1"><a id="_idTextAnchor015"></a>Learning to Cherish Others</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">From the depths of our heart we want to be happy all the time, but we are not usually very concerned with the <a id="_idIndexMarker551"></a>happiness and freedom of others. In reality, however, our own happiness and <a id="_idIndexMarker552"></a>suffering are insignificant compared to that of other <a id="_idIndexMarker553"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker554"></a>living beings. Others are countless, whereas we ourself are just one single person. Understanding this, we must learn to cherish others and accomplish the ultimate, supreme goal of <a id="_idIndexMarker555"></a>human life.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">What is the ultimate, supreme goal of human life? We should ask ourself what we consider to be most important – what do we wish for, strive for or daydream about? For some people it is material <a id="_idIndexMarker556"></a>possessions, such as a large house with all the latest luxuries, a fast car or a well-paid job. For others it is reputation, good looks, power, excitement or adventure. Many try to find the meaning of their life in relationships with people who are objects of their desire. All these things can make us superficially happy for a short while, but they can also cause us much worry and suffering. They can never give us the pure and everlasting <a id="_idIndexMarker557"></a>happiness that all of us, in our heart of hearts, long for. Since we cannot take them with us when we die, if we have made them the principal meaning of our life they will eventually let us down. As an end in themselves <a id="_idIndexMarker558"></a>worldly attainments are hollow; they are not the real meaning of human life.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Of all worldly possessions the most precious is said to be the legendary <a id="_idIndexMarker559"></a>wish-granting jewel. It is impossible to find such a jewel in these degenerate times, but in the past, when human beings had abundant merit, there used to be magical jewels that had the power to grant wishes. These jewels, however, could only fulfil wishes for contaminated happiness – they could never bestow the pure happiness that comes from a pure mind. Furthermore, a wish-granting jewel only had the power to grant wishes in one life – it could not protect its owner in his or her future lives. Thus, ultimately even a wish-granting jewel is deceptive.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">The only thing that will never deceive us is the attainment of full enlightenment. What is <a id="_idIndexMarker560"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker561"></a>enlightenment? It is the inner light of <a id="_idIndexMarker562"></a>wisdom that is completely free from all mistaken appearance, and whose function is to bestow mental peace upon each and every living being every day. It is the source of the happiness of all living beings. A person who possesses this wisdom is an enlightened being. The terms ‘<a id="_idIndexMarker563"></a>enlightened being’ and ‘<a id="_idIndexMarker564"></a>Buddha’ are synonymous. With the exception of enlightened beings, all beings experience mistaken appearances all the time, day and night, even during sleep.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Whatever appears to us, we perceive as existing from its own side. This is mistaken <a id="_idIndexMarker565"></a>appearance. We perceive ‘I’ and ‘mine’ as being<a id="_idIndexMarker566"></a> <a id="_idIndexMarker567"></a>inherently existent, and we <a id="_idIndexMarker568"></a>grasp strongly, believing this appearance to be true. Due to this we perform many inappropriate <a id="_idIndexMarker569"></a>actions that lead us to experience <a id="_idIndexMarker570"></a>suffering. This is the fundamental reason why we experience suffering. Enlightened beings are completely free from mistaken appearances and the sufferings they produce.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">It is only by attaining enlightenment that we can fulfil our deepest wish for pure and lasting happiness, for nothing in this impure world has the power to fulfil this wish. Only when we become a fully enlightened Buddha will we experience the profound and lasting <a id="_idIndexMarker571"></a>peace that comes from a permanent cessation of all <a id="_idIndexMarker572"></a>delusions and their <a id="_idIndexMarker573"></a>imprints. We will be free from all faults and mental obscurations, and will possess the qualities needed to help all living beings directly. We will then be an object of <a id="_idIndexMarker574"></a>refuge for all living beings. Through this understanding we can clearly see that the attainment of enlightenment is the ultimate, supreme goal and real meaning of our precious human life. Since our main wish is to be happy all the time and to be completely free from all faults and suffering, we must develop the strong intention to attain enlightenment. We should think, ‘I need to attain enlightenment because in samsara, the cycle of impure life, there is no real happiness anywhere.’</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">The main cause of enlightenment is <a id="_idIndexMarker575"></a>bodhichitta, the spontaneous wish to attain enlightenment that is motivated by compassion for all living beings. A person who possesses this precious mind of bodhichitta is called a ‘<a id="_idIndexMarker576"></a>Bodhisattva’. The root of bodhichitta is compassion. Since the development of <a id="_idIndexMarker577"></a>compassion depends upon <a id="_idIndexMarker578"></a>cherishing others, the first step to the sublime <a id="_idIndexMarker579"></a>happiness of enlightenment is learning to cherish others. A mother cherishes her children, and we may cherish our friends to a certain degree, but this cherishing is not impartial and is usually mixed with attachment. We need to develop a pure mind that cherishes all living beings without bias or partiality.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Each and every living being has within them the seed, or <a id="_idIndexMarker580"></a>potential, to become a Buddha, a fully enlightened being – this is our <a id="_idIndexMarker581"></a>Buddha nature. In Buddha’s <a id="_idIndexMarker582"></a>teachings we have found the best method to ripen this seed, or potential. What we need to do now is to put these teachings into practice. This is something that only human beings can do. Animals can gather resources, defeat their enemies and protect their families, but they can neither understand nor engage in the spiritual path. It would be a great shame if we were to use our human life only to achieve what <a id="_idIndexMarker583"></a>animals can also achieve, and thereby waste this unique opportunity to become a source of benefit for all living beings.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We are faced with a choice: either we can continue to squander our life in pursuing <a id="_idIndexMarker584"></a>worldly enjoyments that give no real <a id="_idIndexMarker585"></a>satisfaction and disappear when we die, or we can dedicate our life to realizing our full spiritual potential. If we make great effort to practise the instructions contained within this book we will definitely attain enlightenment, but if we make no effort enlightenment will never happen naturally, no matter how long we wait. To follow the <a id="_idIndexMarker586"></a>path to enlightenment there is no need to change our external <a id="_idIndexMarker587"></a>lifestyle. We do not need to abandon our <a id="_idIndexMarker588"></a>family, <a id="_idIndexMarker589"></a>friends or enjoyments, and retire to a mountain cave. All we need to do is change the object of our cherishing.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Until now we have cherished ourself above all others, and for as long as we continue to do this our suffering will never end. However, if we learn to cherish all beings more than ourself we will soon enjoy the bliss of enlightenment. The path to enlightenment is really very simple – all we need to do is stop cherishing ourself and learn to cherish others. All other spiritual <a id="_idIndexMarker590"></a>realizations will naturally follow from this.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Our instinctive view is that we are more important than everyone else, whereas the view of all enlightened beings is that it is others who are more important. Which of these views is more beneficial? In life after life, since <a id="_idIndexMarker591"></a>beginningless time, we have been slaves to our <a id="_idIndexMarker592"></a>self-cherishing mind. We have trusted it implicitly and obeyed its every command, believing that the way to solve our problems and find happiness is to put ourself before everyone else. We have worked so hard and for so long for our own sake, but what do we have to show for it? Have we solved all our problems and found the lasting happiness we desire? No. It is clear that pursuing our own selfish interests has deceived us. After having indulged our self-cherishing for so many lives, now is the time to realize that it simply does not work. Now is the time to switch the object of our cherishing from ourself to all living beings.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">All enlightened beings have discovered that by abandoning <a id="_idIndexMarker593"></a>self-cherishing and cherishing only others they came to experience true peace and happiness. If we practise the methods they taught, there is no reason why we should not be able to do the same. We cannot expect to change our mind overnight, but through practising patiently and consistently the instructions on cherishing others, while at the same time accumulating merit, purifying negativity and receiving blessings, we can gradually replace our ordinary self-cherishing attitude with the sublime attitude of cherishing all living beings.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">To achieve this we do not need to change our <a id="_idIndexMarker594"></a>lifestyle, but we do need to change our views and intentions. Our ordinary view is that we are the centre of the universe and that other people and things derive their significance principally from the way in which they affect us. Our <a id="_idIndexMarker595"></a>car, for example, is important simply because it is <span class="_1---Italic">ours</span>, and our <a id="_idIndexMarker596"></a>friends are important because they make <span class="_1---Italic">us</span> happy. <a id="_idIndexMarker597"></a>Strangers, on the other hand, do not seem so important because they do not directly affect our happiness, and if a stranger’s car is damaged or stolen we are not that concerned. As we will see in later chapters, this self-centred view of the <a id="_idIndexMarker598"></a>world is based on ignorance and does not correspond to reality. This view is the source of all our ordinary, selfish intentions. It is precisely because we think ‘I am important, I need this, I deserve that’ that we engage in <a id="_idIndexMarker599"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker600"></a>negative actions, which result in an endless stream of problems for ourself and others.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">By practising these instructions, we can develop a realistic view of the world, based on an understanding of the <a id="_idIndexMarker601"></a>equality and interdependence of all living beings. Once we view each and every living being as important we will naturally develop good intentions towards them. Whereas the mind that <a id="_idIndexMarker602"></a>cherishes only ourself is the basis for all impure, samsaric experience, the mind that <a id="_idIndexMarker603"></a>cherishes others is the basis for all the good qualities of enlightenment.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Cherishing others is not so difficult – all we need to do is to understand why we should cherish others and then make a firm decision to do so. Through meditating on this decision we will develop a deep and powerful feeling of cherishing for all beings. We then carry this special feeling into our daily life.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">There are two main reasons why we need to cherish all living beings. The first is that they have shown us immense kindness, and the second is that cherishing them has enormous benefits. These will now be explained.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1">THE KINDNESS OF OTHERS</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">We should contemplate the great <a id="_idIndexMarker604"></a>kindness of all living beings. We can begin by remembering the <a id="_idIndexMarker605"></a>kindness of our <a id="_idIndexMarker606"></a>mother of this life; and then, by extension, we can remember the kindness of all other living beings, who, as will be explained below, have been our mothers in <a id="_idIndexMarker607"></a>previous lives. If we cannot appreciate the kindness of our present mother, how will we ever be able to appreciate the kindness of all our previous mothers?</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">It is very easy to forget our mother’s kindness, or to take it for granted and remember only the times when we think she harmed us; therefore we need to remember in detail how kind our mother has been to us from the very beginning of this life.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">In the beginning our mother was kind in offering us a place of rebirth. Before we were conceived in her womb, we wandered about from place to place as an <a id="_idIndexMarker608"></a>intermediate state being – a being who is between death and rebirth – with nowhere to rest. We were blown by the winds of our karma without freedom to choose where we would go, and all our acquaintances were fleeting. We experienced great pain and fear, but from this state we were able to enter the safety of our mother’s womb. Although we were an uninvited guest, when she knew that we had entered her womb our mother let us stay there. If she had wanted to evict us, she could have done so and we would not have been alive today to enjoy all our present opportunities. We are now able to develop the aspiration to attain the supreme happiness of enlightenment only because our mother was kind enough to let us stay in her womb. In winter, when it is cold and stormy outside, if someone invites us into their warm home and entertains us well, we consider this person to be extremely kind. How much kinder is our mother, who let us enter her own body and offered us such good hospitality there!</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When we were in our mother’s womb she protected us carefully, more carefully than she would guard a most precious jewel. In every situation she thought of our safety. She consulted doctors, exercised, ate special foods and nurtured us day and night for nine months; she was also mindful not to do anything that might damage the development of our physical and mental faculties. Because she looked after us so well, we were born with a normal and healthy <a id="_idIndexMarker609"></a>body that we can use to accomplish so many good things.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">At the time of our <a id="_idIndexMarker610"></a>birth our mother experienced great pain, but when she saw us she felt happier than if someone had presented her with a superb treasure. Even during the agony of childbirth our welfare was foremost in her mind. When we were newly born, although we looked more like a frog than a human being, our mother loved us dearly. We were completely helpless, even more helpless than a newborn foal, who can at least stand up and feed as soon as it is born. We were as if blind, unable to identify our parents, and we could not understand anything. If someone had been preparing to kill us, we would not have known. We had no idea what we were doing. We could not even tell when we were urinating.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Who cared for and protected this scarcely human thing? It was our mother. She clothed it, cradled it and fed it with her own milk. She removed the filth from its body without feeling any disgust. Sometimes mothers remove the mucus from their baby’s nose by using their own mouths because they do not want to cause the baby any pain by using their rough hands. Even when our mother had problems, she always showed us a loving expression and called us sweet names. While we were small our mother was constantly watchful. If she had forgotten us for even a short time, we might have met our death or been disabled for life. Each day of our early childhood our mother rescued us from many disasters, and she always considered things from the point of view of our own safety and well-being.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">In the winter she would make sure that we were warm and had good clothing, even when she herself was cold. She always selected the best things for us to eat, taking the worst for herself; and she would rather have been sick herself than see us sick. She would rather have died herself than see us die. Our mother naturally behaves towards us like someone who has gained the realization of <a id="_idIndexMarker611"></a>exchanging self with others, cherishing us even more than she cherishes herself. She is able to put our welfare before her own, and she does so perfectly and spontaneously. If someone were to threaten to kill us she would offer herself to the killer instead. She has such compassion for us.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When we were small our mother would not sleep well. She slept lightly, waking every few hours and remaining alert for our cry. As we grew older our mother taught us how to eat, drink, speak, sit and walk. She sent us to school and encouraged us to do good things in life. If we have any knowledge and skills now, it is mainly as a result of her kindness. When we grew older and became adolescent, we preferred to be with our friends and we would completely forget our mother. While we enjoyed ourself it was as if our mother had ceased to exist, and we would remember her only when we needed something from her. Although we were forgetful and allowed ourself to become completely absorbed in the pleasures we enjoyed with our friends, our mother remained continuously concerned for us. She would often become anxious, and in the back of her mind there was always some worry about us. She had the kind of worry we normally have only for ourself. Even when we are grown up and have a family of our own, our mother does not cease to care for us. She may be old and weak and scarcely able to stand on her feet, and yet she never forgets her children.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">By meditating in this way, recalling the kindness of our mother in great detail, we will come to cherish her very dearly. When we have this feeling of cherishing from the depths of our heart, we should extend it to all other living beings, remembering that every one of them has shown us the same kindness.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">How are all living beings our mothers? Since it is impossible to find a <a id="_idIndexMarker612"></a>beginning to our <a id="_idIndexMarker613"></a>mental continuum it follows that we have taken countless rebirths in the <a id="_idIndexMarker614"></a>past; and if we have had countless rebirths we must have had countless mothers. Where are all these mothers now? They are all the living beings alive today.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">It is incorrect to reason that our mothers of former lives are no longer our mothers just because a long time has passed since they actually cared for us. If our present mother were to die today, would she cease to be our mother? No, we would still regard her as our mother and pray for her happiness. The same is true of all our previous mothers – they died, yet they remain our mothers. It is only because of the changes in our external appearance that we do not recognize each other. In our daily life we see many different living beings, both human and non-human. We regard some as <a id="_idIndexMarker615"></a>friends, some as <a id="_idIndexMarker616"></a>enemies and most as <a id="_idIndexMarker617"></a>strangers. These distinctions are made by our mistaken minds; they are not verified by <a id="_idIndexMarker618"></a>valid minds.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Because of changing our rebirth we do not recognize our former mothers, relatives and friends, and now because of this we see the majority of living beings as strangers and many even as our <a id="_idIndexMarker619"></a>enemies. This <a id="_idIndexMarker620"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker621"></a>mistaken appearance and conception is <a id="_idIndexMarker622"></a>ignorance. Strangers and enemies are just creations of this ignorance. In truth there are no living beings who are strangers or our enemies because they are all our mothers, relatives or close friends. Our only real enemy is our <a id="_idIndexMarker623"></a>delusions such as our uncontrolled desire, or attachment, our anger and jealousy, and especially our self-grasping ignorance. Understanding and believing this will give us great meaning in this life and in our countless future lives.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We can then meditate on the <a id="_idIndexMarker624"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker625"></a>kindness of our mothers when we took other types of rebirth, considering, for example, how attentively a mother bird protects her eggs from danger and how she shields her young beneath her wings. When a hunter comes, she does not fly away and leave her chicks unprotected. All day long she searches for food to nourish them until they are strong enough to leave the nest.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">There was once a <a id="_idIndexMarker626"></a>robber in Tibet who stabbed a horse who was carrying a foal in her womb. His knife penetrated so deeply into the side of the horse that it cut open her uterus and the foal emerged through its mother’s side. As she was dying, the mother spent her last strength licking her offspring with great affection. Seeing this, the robber was filled with remorse. He was amazed to see how, even in the pains of death, this mother had such compassion for her foal and how her only concern was for its welfare. He then ceased his non-virtuous way of life and began to follow spiritual paths purely.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Every single living being has shown us the same selfless concern, the perfect kindness of a mother. Moreover, even if we do not consider other living beings as our mother, still they have shown us tremendous kindness. Our <a id="_idIndexMarker627"></a>body, for example, is the result of the kindness not only of our parents but of countless beings who have provided it with food, shelter and so forth. It is because we have this present body with human faculties that we are able to enjoy all the pleasures and opportunities of human life. Even simple pleasures such as going for a walk or watching a beautiful sunset can be seen to be a result of the kindness of innumerable living beings. Our skills and abilities all come from the kindness of others; we had to be taught how to eat, how to walk, how to talk and how to read and write. Even the language we speak is not our own invention but the product of many generations. Without it we could not communicate with others or share their ideas. We could not read this book, learn spiritual practices or even think clearly. All the facilities we take for granted, such as houses, cars, roads, shops, schools, hospitals and the internet, are produced solely through others’ kindness. When we travel by bus or car we take the roads for granted, but many people worked very hard to build them and make them safe for us to use.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">The fact that some of the people who help us may have no intention of doing so is irrelevant. We receive benefit from their actions, so from our point of view this is a kindness. Rather than focusing on their <a id="_idIndexMarker628"></a>motivation, which in any case we do not know, we should focus on the practical benefit we receive. Everyone who contributes in any way towards our happiness and well-being is deserving of our gratitude and respect. If we had to give back everything that others have given us, we would have nothing left at all.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We might argue that we are not given things freely but have to work for them. When we go shopping we have to pay, and when we eat in a restaurant we have to pay. We may have the use of a car, but we had to buy the car, and now we have to pay for petrol, tax and insurance. No one gives us anything for free. But from where do we get this money? It is true that generally we have to work for our money, but it is others who employ us or buy our goods, and so indirectly it is they who provide us with money. Moreover, the reason we are able to do a particular job is that we have received the necessary training or education from other people. Wherever we look, we find only the kindness of others. We are all interconnected in a web of kindness from which it is impossible to separate ourself. Everything we have and everything we enjoy, including our very life, is due to the kindness of others. In fact, every happiness there is in the world arises as a result of others’ kindness.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Our <a id="_idIndexMarker629"></a>spiritual development and the pure happiness of full <a id="_idIndexMarker630"></a>enlightenment also depend upon the kindness of living beings. Our opportunity to read, contemplate and meditate on spiritual teachings depends entirely upon the kindness of others. Moreover, as explained later, without living beings to give to, to test our patience or to develop compassion for, we could never develop the virtuous qualities needed to attain enlightenment.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">In short, we need others for our physical, emotional and spiritual well-being. Without others we are nothing. Our sense that we are an island, an <a id="_idIndexMarker631"></a>independent, self-sufficient individual, bears no relation to reality. It is closer to the truth to picture ourself as a cell in the vast body of life, distinct yet intimately bound up with all living beings. We cannot exist without others, and they in turn are affected by everything we do. The idea that it is possible to secure our own welfare while neglecting that of others, or even at the expense of others, is completely unrealistic.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">Contemplating the innumerable ways in which others help us, we should make a firm decision: ‘I must cherish all living beings because they are so kind to me.’ Based on this determination, we develop a feeling of cherishing – a sense that all living beings are important and that their happiness and freedom are also important. We try to mix our mind single-pointedly with this feeling and maintain it for as long as we can without forgetting it. When we rise from meditation, we try to maintain this mind of love, so that whenever we meet or remember someone we naturally think, ‘This person is important, this person’s happiness and freedom are important.’ In this way, we will make progress in our practice of learning to cherish others.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1">THE BENEFITS OF <a id="_idIndexMarker632"></a>CHERISHING OTHERS</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">Another reason for cherishing others is that it is the best method to solve our own and others’ <a id="_idIndexMarker633"></a>problems. Problems, worry, pain and <a id="_idIndexMarker634"></a>unhappiness are types of mind; they are feelings and do not exist outside the mind. If we cherish everyone we meet or think about, our mind will be at peace all the time so that we will be happy all the time and there will be no basis for developing <a id="_idIndexMarker635"></a>jealousy, anger or other harmful thoughts. Jealousy, for example, is a state of mind that cannot bear another’s good fortune; but if we cherish someone how can his or her good fortune disturb our mind? How can we wish to harm others if we regard everyone’s happiness to be of paramount importance? By genuinely cherishing all living beings we will always act with <a id="_idIndexMarker636"></a>loving kindness, in a friendly and considerate way, and they will return our kindness. Others will not act unpleasantly towards us, and there will be no basis for conflict or disputes. People will come to like us, and our <a id="_idIndexMarker637"></a>relationships will be more stable and satisfying.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Cherishing others also protects us from the problems caused by desirous attachment. We often become strongly <a id="_idIndexMarker638"></a>attached to another person who we feel will help us to overcome our <a id="_idIndexMarker639"></a>loneliness by providing the comfort, security or excitement we crave. However, if we have a loving mind towards everyone we do not feel lonely. Instead of clinging onto others to fulfil our desires, we will want to help them fulfil their needs and wishes. Cherishing all living beings solves all our problems because all our problems come from our mind of <a id="_idIndexMarker640"></a>self-cherishing. For example, at the moment if our partner left us for someone else we would probably feel very upset, but if we truly cherished them we would want them to be happy, and we would <a id="_idIndexMarker641"></a>rejoice in their happiness. There would be no basis for us to feel jealous or depressed, so, although we might find the situation challenging, it would not be a problem for us. Cherishing others is the supreme <a id="_idIndexMarker642"></a>protection from suffering and problems, and enables us to remain calm and peaceful all the time.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Cherishing our neighbours and the people in our local area will naturally lead to harmony in the community and society at large, and this will make everyone happier. We may not be a well-known or powerful figure, but if we sincerely cherish everyone we meet we can make a profound contribution to our community. This is true even for those who deny the value of <a id="_idIndexMarker643"></a>religion. If a schoolteacher cherishes his or her students, and is free from self-concern, the students will respect him and learn not only the subject he teaches, but also the kind and admirable qualities he demonstrates. Such a teacher will naturally influence those around him in a positive way, and his presence will transform the whole school. It is said that there exists a <a id="_idIndexMarker644"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker645"></a>magic crystal that has the power to purify any liquid in which it is placed. Those who cherish all living beings are like this crystal – by their very presence they remove negativity from the world and give back love and kindness.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Even if someone is clever and powerful, if he does not love others, sooner or later he will encounter problems and find it difficult to fulfil his wishes. If the ruler of a country does not cherish his or her people but is concerned only with his own interests, he will be criticized and mistrusted, and eventually lose his position. If a <a id="_idIndexMarker646"></a>Spiritual Teacher does not cherish and have a good relationship with his or her students, the students will find it difficult to develop faith in him, and this will make his teachings powerless.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">If an employer is concerned only with his own interests and does not look after the welfare of his employees, the employees will be unhappy. They will probably work inefficiently, and will certainly not be enthusiastic about fulfilling their employer’s wishes. Thus, the employer will suffer from his own lack of <a id="_idIndexMarker647"></a>consideration towards his employees. Similarly, if the employees are concerned only with what they can get out of the company, this will anger their employer, who may reduce their wages or ask them to leave. The company may even go bankrupt, causing them all to lose their jobs. In this way, the employees will suffer from their lack of consideration towards their employer. In every field of activity the best way to ensure success is for the people involved to reduce their self-cherishing and to have a greater sense of consideration for others. There may sometimes appear to be short-term advantages to self-cherishing, but in the long term there are always only problems. The solution to all the problems of daily life is to cherish others.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">All the <a id="_idIndexMarker648"></a>suffering we experience is the result of negative karma, and the source of all <a id="_idIndexMarker649"></a>negative karma is self-cherishing. It is because we have such an exaggerated sense of our own importance that we frustrate other people’s wishes in order to fulfil our own. Driven by our selfish desires, we think nothing of destroying others’ peace of mind and causing them distress. Such <a id="_idIndexMarker650"></a>actions only sow the seeds for future suffering. If we sincerely cherish others we will have no wish to hurt them and will stop engaging in destructive and harmful actions. We will naturally observe pure <a id="_idIndexMarker651"></a>moral discipline and refrain from killing or being cruel to other living beings, stealing from them or interfering with their relationships. As a result, we will not have to experience the unpleasant effects of these negative actions in the future. In this way, cherishing others protects us from all future problems caused by negative karma.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">By cherishing others we continuously accumulate <a id="_idIndexMarker652"></a>merit, and merit is the main cause of success in all our activities. If we cherish all living beings we will naturally perform many <a id="_idIndexMarker653"></a>virtuous and helpful actions. Gradually all our actions of body, speech and mind will become pure and beneficial, and we will become a source of happiness and inspiration for everyone we meet. We will discover through our own experience that this precious mind of love is the real <a id="_idIndexMarker654"></a>wish-granting jewel, for it fulfils the pure wishes of both ourself and all living beings.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">The mind that cherishes all living beings is extremely precious. Keeping such a good heart will result only in happiness for ourself and all those around us. This <a id="_idIndexMarker655"></a>good heart gives rise to <a id="_idIndexMarker656"></a>universal compassion – the spontaneous wish to permanently liberate all living beings from fear and suffering. This eventually transforms into the universal <a id="_idIndexMarker657"></a>compassion of an enlightened Buddha, which actually has the power to protect all living beings from suffering. In this way, cherishing others leads us to the ultimate, supreme goal of <a id="_idIndexMarker658"></a>human life.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">Through contemplating all these advantages of cherishing others we arrive at the following determination:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---prose---single"><span class="_1---Italic">I will cherish all living beings without exception because this precious mind of love is the supreme method for solving all problems and fulfilling all wishes. Eventually it will give me the supreme happiness of enlightenment.</span></p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para _idGenParaOverride-1">We meditate on this determination single-pointedly for as long as possible, and develop a strong feeling of cherishing each and every living being. When we rise from meditation we try to maintain this feeling and put our resolution into practice. Whenever we are with other people we should be continuously mindful that their happiness and freedom are at least as important as our own. Of course we cannot cherish all living beings right away, but by training our mind in this attitude, beginning with our family and friends, we can gradually extend the scope of our love until it embraces all living beings. When in this way we sincerely cherish all living beings, we are no longer an ordinary person but have become a great being, like a <a id="_idIndexMarker659"></a>Bodhisattva.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
