<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		<title>How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-33</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
		<link href="css/eBook_CSS_November2016.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-33" lang="en-GB" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<div>
			<p id="_idParaDest-30" class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_00-Chapter-title---TOC-Level-1"><a id="_idTextAnchor028"></a>Bibliography</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-text-full-space-below">Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche is a highly respected meditation master and scholar of the Mahayana Buddhist tradition founded by Je Tsongkhapa. Since arriving in the West in 1977, Venerable Geshe Kelsang has worked tirelessly to establish pure Buddhadharma throughout the world. Over this period he has given extensive teachings on the major scriptures of the Mahayana. These teachings provide a comprehensive presentation of the essential Sutra and Tantra practices of Mahayana Buddhism.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-title---entry"><span class="_1---Bold">Books</span></p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-text">The following books by Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche are all published by Tharpa Publications.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Bodhisattva Vow</span> A practical guide to helping others. (2nd. edn., 1995)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Clear Light of Bliss</span> A Tantric meditation manual. (3rd. edn., 2014)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Essence of Vajrayana</span> The Highest Yoga Tantra practice of Heruka body mandala. (1997)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Great Treasury of Merit</span> How to rely upon a Spiritual Guide. (2nd. edn., 2015)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life</span> How to enjoy a life of great meaning and altruism. (A translation of Shantideva’s famous verse masterpiece.) (2002)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Heart Jewel </span>The essential practices of Kadampa Buddhism. (2nd. edn., 1997)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">How to Solve Our Human Problems</span> The four noble truths. (2005)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">How to Transform Your Life</span> A blissful journey. (3rd. edn., 2016)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span> The nature and power of the mind. (4th. edn., 2014)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Introduction to Buddhism</span> An explanation of the Buddhist way of life. (2nd. edn., 2001)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span> The complete Buddhist path to enlightenment. (2nd. edn., 1995)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Living Meaningfully, Dying Joyfully</span> The profound practice of transference of consciousness. (1999)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Mahamudra Tantra </span>The supreme Heart Jewel nectar. (2005)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Meaningful to Behold</span> Becoming a friend of the world. (5th. edn., 2007)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Modern Buddhism</span> The path of compassion and wisdom. (2nd. edn., 2013)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The New Eight Steps to Happiness</span> The Buddhist way of loving kindness. (3rd. edn., 2016)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The New Guide to Dakini Land </span>The Highest Yoga Tantra practice of Buddha Vajrayogini. (3rd. edn., 2012)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The New Heart of Wisdom</span> Profound teachings from Buddha’s heart (An explanation of the <span class="_1---Italic">Heart Sutra</span>). (5th. edn., 2012)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The New Meditation Handbook</span> Meditations to make our life happy and meaningful. (5th. edn., 2013)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Ocean of Nectar</span> The true nature of all things. (1995)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Oral Instructions of Mahamudra</span> The very essence of Buddha’s teachings of Sutra and Tantra. (2nd. edn., 2016)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Tantric Grounds and Paths</span> How to enter, progress on, and complete the Vajrayana path. (1994)</p>

			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines-full-space-below"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Universal Compassion</span> Inspiring solutions for difficult times. (4th. edn., 2002)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-title---entry"><span class="_1---Bold">Sadhanas and Other Booklets</span></p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-text">Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche has also supervised the translation of a collection of essential sadhanas, or ritual prayers for spiritual attainments, available in booklet or audio formats.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Avalokiteshvara Sadhana</span> Prayers and requests to the Buddha of Compassion.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Blissful Path</span> The condensed self-generation sadhana of Vajrayogini.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Bodhisattva’s Confession of Moral Downfalls</span> The purification practice of the <span class="_1---Italic">Mahayana Sutra of the Three Superior Heap</span>s.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Condensed Essence of Vajrayana</span> Condensed Heruka body mandala self-generation sadhana.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Condensed Long Life Practice of Buddha Amitayus</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Dakini Yoga</span> The middling self-generation sadhana of Vajrayogini.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Drop of Essential Nectar</span> A special fasting and purification practice in conjunction with Eleven-faced Avalokiteshvara.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Essence of Good Fortune</span> Prayers for the six preparatory practices for meditation on the stages of the path to enlightenment.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Essence of Vajrayana</span> Heruka body mandala self-generation sadhana according to the system of Mahasiddha Ghantapa.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Feast of Great Bliss </span>Vajrayogini self-initiation sadhana.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Great Liberation of the Father </span>Preliminary prayers for Mahamudra meditation in conjunction with Heruka practice.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Great Liberation of the Mother</span> Preliminary prayers for Mahamudra meditation in conjunction with Vajrayogini practice.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Great Mother</span> A method to overcome hindrances and obstacles by reciting the <span class="_1---Italic">Essence of Wisdom Sutra</span> (the <span class="_1---Italic">Heart Sutra</span>)</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">A Handbook for the Daily Practice of Bodhisattva and Tantric Vows.</span></p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Heart Jewel</span> The Guru yoga of Je Tsongkhapa combined with the condensed sadhana of his Dharma Protector.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Heartfelt Prayers</span> Funeral service for cremations and burials.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Hundreds of Deities of the Joyful Land According to Highest Yoga Tantra</span> The Guru yoga of Je Tsongkhapa as a Preliminary Practice for Mahamudra</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Kadampa Way of Life </span>The essential practice of Kadam Lamrim.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Keajra Heaven </span>The essential commentary to the practice of <span class="_1---Italic">The Uncommon Yoga of Inconceivability</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Lay Pratimoksha Vow Ceremony</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Liberating Prayer</span> Praise to Buddha Shakyamuni.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Liberation from Sorrow</span> Praises and requests to the Twenty-one Taras.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Mahayana Refuge Ceremony and Bodhisattva Vow Ceremony</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Medicine Buddha Prayer</span> A method for benefiting others.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Medicine Buddha Sadhana</span> A method for accomplishing the attainments of Medicine Buddha.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Meditation and Recitation of Solitary Vajrasattva</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Melodious Drum Victorious in all Directions</span> The extensive fulfilling and restoring ritual of the Dharma Protector, the great king Dorje Shugden, in conjunction with Mahakala, Kalarupa, Kalindewi and other Dharma Protectors.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The New Essence of Vajrayana</span> Heruka body mandala self-generation practice, an instruction of the Ganden Oral Lineage.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Offering to the Spiritual Guide</span> (<span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Lama Chopa</span>) A special way of relying upon a Spiritual Guide.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Path of Compassion for the Deceased </span>Powa sadhana for the benefit of the deceased.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Pathway to the Pure Land</span> Training in powa – the transference of consciousness.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Powa Ceremony</span> Transference of consciousness for the deceased.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Prayers for Meditation</span> Brief preparatory prayers for meditation.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Prayers for World Peace</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">A Pure Life </span>The practice of taking and keeping the eight Mahayana precepts.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Quick Path to Great Bliss</span> The extensive self-generation sadhana of Vajrayogini.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Requests to the Holy Spiritual Guide Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso from his Faithful Disciples</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Root Tantra of Heruka and Vajrayogini </span>Chapters One &amp; Fifty-one of the <span class="_1---Italic">Condensed Heruka Root Tantra</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Root Text: Eight Verses of Training the Mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Treasury of Wisdom </span>The sadhana of Venerable Manjushri.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Uncommon Yoga of Inconceivability</span> The special instruction of how to reach the Pure Land of Keajra with this human body</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Union of No More Learning</span> Heruka body mandala self-initiation sadhana.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Vows and Commitments of Kadampa Buddhism</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Wishfulfilling Jewel </span>The Guru yoga of Je Tsongkhapa combined with the sadhana of his Dharma Protector.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Yoga of Buddha Amitayus</span> A special method for increasing lifespan, wisdom and merit.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Yoga of Buddha Heruka</span> The essential self-generation sadhana of Heruka body mandala &amp; Condensed six-session Yoga.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Yoga of Buddha Maitreya </span>Self-generation sadhana.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Yoga of Buddha Vajrapani</span> Self-generation sadhana.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Yoga of Enlightened Mother Arya Tara</span> Self-generation sadhana.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Yoga of Great Mother Prajnaparamita</span> Self-generation sadhana.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Yoga of Thousand-armed Avalokiteshvara</span> Self-generation sadhana.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-entry---2-lines"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">The Yoga of White Tara, Buddha of Long Life</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Biblio-text">To order any of our publications, or to request a catalogue, please visit <a href="http://www.tharpa.com">www.tharpa.com</a> or contact <a href="How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-34.xhtml#_idTextAnchor029"><span class="_1---Hyperlink">your nearest Tharpa office</span></a>.</p>
		</div>
		<div class="_idGenObjectLayout-2">
			<div id="_idContainer054" class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			</div>
		</div>
		<div class="_idGenObjectLayout-2">
			<div id="_idContainer055" class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			</div>
		</div>
		<div class="_idGenObjectLayout-2">
			<div id="_idContainer056" class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			</div>
		</div>
		<div class="_idGenObjectLayout-2">
			<div id="_idContainer057" class="Basic-Text-Frame">
			</div>
		</div>
		<div id="_idContainer058">
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
