<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		<title>How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-14</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
		<link href="css/eBook_CSS_November2016.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-14" lang="en-GB" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<div>
			<p id="_idParaDest-12" class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_00-Chapter-title---TOC-Level-1"><a id="_idTextAnchor010"></a>Samsara</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">The word <a id="_idIndexMarker281"></a>samsara is Sanskrit, and means cycle of <a id="_idIndexMarker282"></a>contaminated rebirth, or cycle of impure life. The cycle of contaminated rebirth refers to repeatedly taking a contaminated <a id="_idIndexMarker283"></a>body and mind, which are also called ‘contaminated aggregates’. Normally, whenever our body is sick we think ‘I am sick’, and whenever our mind is unhappy we think ‘I am unhappy’. This clearly indicates that we believe our body and mind are our self. This belief is <a id="_idIndexMarker284"></a>ignorance because our body and mind are not our self; they are the possessions of our self, as indicated by our saying ‘My body, my mind’. Because of this ignorance believing that our body and mind are our self we develop various kinds of <a id="_idIndexMarker285"></a>mistaken appearance through which we experience various kinds of suffering and problems as <a id="_idIndexMarker286"></a>hallucinations, throughout this life and in life after life without end. From this we can understand that since beginningless time until now our way of identifying our <a id="_idIndexMarker287"></a>self has been mistaken. To reduce and finally completely cease our experience of suffering and problems as hallucinations we need to identify our self correctly through training in the spiritual paths that I will explain in the chapter <span class="_1---Italic">Ultimate Bodhichitta</span>. Through the instructions presented in that chapter we will understand the way things really are. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We should know that our <a id="_idIndexMarker288"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker289"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker290"></a>human life is precious and of real value only when we use it to train in spiritual paths. In itself it is a true <a id="_idIndexMarker291"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker292"></a>suffering. We experience various types of suffering because we have taken a <a id="_idIndexMarker293"></a>rebirth that is contaminated by the inner poison of delusions. This experience has no beginning, because we have taken <a id="_idIndexMarker294"></a>contaminated <a id="_idIndexMarker295"></a>rebirths since beginningless time, and it will have no end unless we attain the supreme inner peace of nirvana. If we contemplate and meditate on how we experience sufferings and difficulties throughout our life, and in life after life, we will come to the strong conclusion that every single one of our sufferings and problems arises because we took contaminated rebirth. We will then develop a strong wish to abandon the cycle of contaminated rebirth, samsara. This wish is called ‘<a id="_idIndexMarker296"></a>renunciation’, and it is through developing this wish that we actually enter the path to <a id="_idIndexMarker297"></a>liberation, or nirvana. From this point of view, contemplating and meditating on suffering has great meaning. The main purpose of this meditation is to avoid having to go through all of these experiences again in the future.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">While we remain in this <a id="_idIndexMarker298"></a>cycle of contaminated rebirth, sufferings and problems will never end – we will have to experience them over and over again every time we take rebirth. Although we cannot remember our experience while we were in our mother’s womb or during our very early childhood, the sufferings of human life began from the time of our conception. Everyone can observe that a newborn baby experiences anguish and pain. The first thing a baby does when it is born is scream. Rarely has a baby ever been born in complete serenity, with a peaceful, smiling expression on its face.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1"><a id="_idIndexMarker299"></a>BIRTH</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">When our consciousness first enters the union of our father’s sperm and our mother’s ovum, our body is a very hot, watery substance like white yoghurt tinted red. In the first moments after conception we have no gross feelings, but as soon as these develop we begin to experience pain. Our body gradually becomes harder and harder, and as our limbs grow it feels as if our body were being stretched out on a rack. Inside our mother’s womb it is hot and dark. Our home for nine months is this small, tightly compressed space full of unclean substances. It is like being squashed inside a small water tank full of filthy liquid with the lid tightly shut so that no air or light can come through.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">While we are in our <a id="_idIndexMarker300"></a>mother’s womb we experience much pain and fear all on our own. We are extremely sensitive to everything our mother does. When she walks quickly it feels as if we were falling from a high mountain and we are terrified. If she has sexual intercourse it feels as if we were being crushed and suffocated between two huge weights and we panic. If our mother makes just a small jump it feels as if we were being dashed against the ground from a great height. If she drinks anything hot it feels like boiling water scalding our skin, and if she drinks anything cold it feels like an ice-cold shower in midwinter.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When we are emerging from our mother’s womb it feels as if we were being forced through a narrow crevice between two hard rocks, and when we are newly born our body is so delicate that any kind of contact is painful. Even if someone holds us very tenderly, his or her hands feel like thorn bushes piercing our flesh, and the most delicate fabrics feel rough and abrasive. By comparison with the softness and smoothness of our mother’s womb, every tactile sensation is harsh and painful. If someone picks us up it feels as if we were being swung over a huge precipice, and we feel frightened and insecure. We have forgotten all that we knew in our past life; we bring only pain and confusion from our mother’s womb. Whatever we hear is as meaningless as the sound of wind, and we cannot comprehend anything we perceive. In the first few weeks we are like someone who is blind, deaf and dumb, and suffering from profound amnesia. When we are hungry we cannot say ‘I need food’, and when we are in pain we cannot say ‘This is hurting me.’ The only signs we can make are hot tears and furious gestures. Our mother often has no idea what pains and discomforts we are experiencing. We are completely helpless and have to be taught everything – how to eat, how to sit, how to walk, how to talk.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Although we are most vulnerable in the first few weeks of our life, our pains do not cease as we grow up. We continue to experience various kinds of suffering throughout our life. Just as when we light a fire in a large house, the heat from the fire pervades the whole house and all the heat in the house comes from the fire, so, when we are born in samsara, suffering pervades our whole life, and all the miseries we experience arise because we took a contaminated rebirth.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">Since we have been born as a human, we cherish our human body and mind and cling to them as our own. In dependence upon observing our body and mind, we develop <a id="_idIndexMarker301"></a>self-grasping, which is the root of all delusions. Our human rebirth is the basis of our human suffering; without this basis, there are no human problems. The pains of birth gradually turn into the pains of ageing, sickness and death – they are one continuum.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1">SICKNESS</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">Our birth also gives rise to the sufferings of <a id="_idIndexMarker302"></a>sickness. Just as the wind and snow of winter take away the glory of green meadows, trees, forests and flowers, so sickness takes away the youthful splendour of our body, destroying its strength and the power of our senses. If we are usually fit and well, when we become sick we are suddenly unable to engage in all our normal physical activities. Even a champion boxer who is usually able to knock out all his opponents becomes completely helpless when sickness strikes. Sickness makes all our experiences of daily enjoyments disappear and causes us to experience unpleasant feelings day and night. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When we fall ill, we are like a bird that has been soaring in the sky and is suddenly shot down. When a bird is shot, it falls straight to the ground like a lump of lead, and all its glory and power are immediately destroyed. In a similar way, when we become ill we are suddenly incapacitated. If we are seriously ill we may become completely dependent upon others and lose even the ability to control our bodily functions. This transformation is hard to bear, especially for those who pride themselves on their independence and physical well-being.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When we are ill, we feel frustrated as we cannot do our usual work or complete all the tasks we have set ourself. We easily become impatient with our illness and depressed about all the things we cannot do. We cannot enjoy the things that usually give us <a id="_idIndexMarker303"></a>pleasure, such as sport, dancing, drinking, eating rich foods, or the company of our friends. All these limitations make us feel even more miserable; and, to add to our unhappiness, we have to endure all the physical pains the illness brings.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When we are sick, not only do we have to experience all the unwanted pains of the illness itself, but we also have to experience all sorts of other unwished for things. For example, we have to take whatever cure is prescribed, whether it be a foul-tasting medicine, a series of injections, a major operation, or abstinence from something we like very much. If we are to have an operation, we have to go to hospital and accept all the conditions there. We may have to eat food we do not like and stay in bed all day long with nothing to do, and we may feel anxiety about the operation. Our doctor may not explain to us exactly what the problem is and whether or not he or she expects us to survive.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">If we learn that our sickness is incurable, and we have no spiritual experience, we will suffer anxiety, fear and regret. We may become depressed and give up hope, or we may become angry with our illness, feeling that it is an enemy that has maliciously deprived us of all our joy.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1"><a id="_idIndexMarker304"></a>AGEING</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">Our birth gives rise to the pains of ageing. Ageing steals our beauty, our health, our good figure, our fine complexion, our vitality and our comfort. Ageing turns us into objects of contempt. It brings many unwanted pains and takes us swiftly to our death.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">As we grow old we lose all the beauty of our youth, and our strong, healthy body becomes weak and burdened with illness. Our once firm and well-proportioned figure becomes bent and disfigured, and our muscles and flesh shrink so that our limbs become like thin sticks and our bones poke out. Our hair loses its colour and shine, and our complexion loses its lustre. Our face becomes wrinkled and our features grow distorted. <a id="_idIndexMarker305"></a>Milarepa said:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---prose---single">How do old people get up? They get up as if they were heaving a stake out of the ground. How do old people walk about? Once they are on their feet they have to walk gingerly, like bird-catchers. How do old people sit down? They crash down like heavy luggage whose harness has snapped.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">We can contemplate the following poem on the sufferings of growing old, written by the great scholar <a id="_idIndexMarker306"></a>Gungtang:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">When we are old, our hair becomes white,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But not because we have washed it clean;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">It is a sign we will soon encounter the Lord of Death.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">We have wrinkles on our forehead,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But not because we have too much flesh;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">It is a warning from the Lord of Death: ‘You are about to die.’</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Our teeth fall out,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But not to make room for new ones;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">It is a sign we will soon lose the ability to eat human food.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Our faces are ugly and unpleasant,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But not because we are wearing masks;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">It is a sign we have lost the mask of youth.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Our heads shake to and fro,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But not because we are in disagreement;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">It is the Lord of Death striking our head with the stick he holds in his right hand.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">We walk bent and gazing at the ground,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But not because we are searching for lost needles;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">It is a sign we are searching for our lost beauty and memories.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">We get up from the ground using all four limbs,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But not because we are imitating animals;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">It is a sign our legs are too weak to support our body.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">We sit down as if we had suddenly fallen,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But not because we are angry;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">It is a sign our body has lost its strength.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Our body sways as we walk,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But not because we think we are important;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">It is a sign our legs cannot carry our body.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Our hands shake,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But not because they are itching to steal;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">It is a sign the Lord of Death’s itchy fingers are stealing our possessions.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">We eat very little,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But not because we are miserly;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">It is a sign we cannot digest our food.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">We wheeze frequently,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But not because we are whispering mantras to the sick;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">It is a sign our breathing will soon disappear.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When we are young, we can travel around the whole world, but when we are old we can hardly make it to our own front door. We become too weak to engage in many worldly activities, and our <a id="_idIndexMarker307"></a>spiritual activities are often curtailed. For example, we have little physical strength to perform virtuous actions, and little mental energy to memorize, contemplate and <a id="_idIndexMarker308"></a>meditate. We cannot attend teachings that are given in places that are hard to reach or uncomfortable to inhabit. We cannot help others in ways that require physical strength and good health. Deprivations such as these often make old people very sad.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When we grow old, we become like someone who is blind and deaf. We cannot see clearly, and we need stronger and stronger glasses until we can no longer read. We cannot hear clearly, and so it becomes more and more difficult to listen to music or to the television, or to hear what others are saying. Our memory fades. All activities, worldly and spiritual, become more difficult. If we practise meditation, it becomes harder for us to gain realizations because our memory and <a id="_idIndexMarker309"></a>concentration are too weak. We cannot apply ourself to study. Thus, if we have not learnt and trained in spiritual practices when we were younger, the only thing to do when we grow old is to develop regret and wait for the Lord of Death to come.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">When we are old we cannot derive the same <a id="_idIndexMarker310"></a>enjoyment from the things we used to enjoy, such as food, drink and sex. We are too weak to play games and we are often too exhausted even for entertainments. As our life span runs out we cannot join young people in their activities. When they travel about we have to stay behind. No one wants to take us with them when we are old, and no one wants to visit us. Even our own grandchildren do not want to stay with us for very long. Old people often think to themselves, ‘How wonderful it would be if young people would stay with me; we could go out for walks and I could show them things’, but young people do not want to be included in their plans. As their life draws to an end, old people experience the sorrow of abandonment and loneliness. They have many special sorrows.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1">DEATH</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">Our birth also gives rise to the sufferings of <a id="_idIndexMarker311"></a>death. If during our life we have worked hard to acquire possessions, and if we have become very <a id="_idIndexMarker312"></a>attached to them, we will experience great suffering at the time of death, thinking, ‘Now I have to leave all my precious possessions behind.’ Even now we find it difficult to lend one of our most treasured <a id="_idIndexMarker313"></a>possessions to someone else, let alone to give it away. No wonder we become so miserable when we realize that in the hands of death we must abandon everything.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When we die, we have to part from even our closest <a id="_idIndexMarker314"></a>friends. We have to leave our partner, even though we may have been together for years and never spent a day apart. If we are very <a id="_idIndexMarker315"></a>attached to our friends we will experience great misery at the time of death, but all we will be able to do is hold their hands. We will not be able to halt the process of death, even if they plead with us not to die. Usually when we are very attached to someone we feel <a id="_idIndexMarker316"></a>jealous if he or she leaves us on our own and spends time with someone else, but when we die we will have to leave our friends with others for ever. We will have to leave everyone, including our family and all the people who have helped us in this life.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When we die, this <a id="_idIndexMarker317"></a>body that we have cherished and cared for in so many ways will have to be left behind. It will become mindless like a stone, and will be buried in the ground or cremated. If we do not have the inner <a id="_idIndexMarker318"></a>protection of spiritual experience, at the time of death we will experience fear and distress, as well as physical pain.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">When our consciousness departs from our body at death, all the <a id="_idIndexMarker319"></a>potentialities we have accumulated in our mind by performing virtuous and non-virtuous actions will go with it. Other than these we cannot take anything out of this world. All other things deceive us. Death ends all our activities – our conversation, our eating, our meeting with friends, our sleep. Everything draws to a close on the day of our death and we must leave all things behind, even the rings on our fingers. In Tibet beggars carry a stick to defend themselves against dogs. To understand the complete deprivation of death, we should remember that at the time of death beggars have to leave even this old stick, the most meagre of human possessions. All over the world we can see that names carved on stone are the only possessions of the dead.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1">OTHER TYPES OF SUFFERING</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">We also have to experience the <a id="_idIndexMarker320"></a>sufferings of separation, having to encounter what we do not like, and not fulfilling our wishes – which include the sufferings of poverty, and of being harmed by humans and non-humans, and by water, fire, wind and earth. Before the final separation at the time of death we often have to experience temporary separation from the people and things we like, which causes us mental pain. We may have to leave our country where all our friends and relatives live, or we may have to leave the job we like. We may lose our reputation. Many times in this life we have to experience the misery of departing from the people we like, or forsaking and losing the things we find pleasant and attractive; but when we <a id="_idIndexMarker321"></a>die we have to part forever from all our companions and <a id="_idIndexMarker322"></a>enjoyments, and from all the outer and inner conditions for our pure spiritual practice, or Dharma practice, of this life.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We often have to meet and live with people whom we do not like, or encounter situations that we find unpleasant. Sometimes we may find ourself in a very dangerous situation such as in a fire or a flood, or where there is violence such as in a riot or a battle. Our lives are full of less extreme situations that we find annoying. Sometimes we are prevented from doing the things we want to do. On a sunny day we may set off for the beach but find ourself stuck in a traffic jam. We continually experience interference from our inner demon of delusions, which disturbs our mind and our spiritual practices. There are countless conditions that <a id="_idIndexMarker323"></a>frustrate our plans and prevent us from doing what we want. It is as if we were living in a thorn bush – whenever we try to move, we are wounded by circumstances. People and things are like thorns piercing our flesh and no situation ever feels entirely comfortable. The more desires and plans we have, the more frustrations we experience. The more we want certain situations, the more we find ourself stuck in situations we do not want. Every desire seems to invite its own obstacle. Undesired situations befall us without our looking for them. In fact, the only things that come effortlessly are the things we do not want. No one wants to die, but <a id="_idIndexMarker324"></a>death comes effortlessly. No one wants to be sick, but <a id="_idIndexMarker325"></a>sickness comes effortlessly. Because we have taken <a id="_idIndexMarker326"></a>rebirth without freedom or control, we have an impure <a id="_idIndexMarker327"></a>body and inhabit an impure environment, and so undesirable things pour in upon us. In samsara, this kind of experience is entirely natural.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We have countless <a id="_idIndexMarker328"></a>desires, but no matter how much effort we make we never feel that we have <a id="_idIndexMarker329"></a>satisfied them. Even when we get what we want, we do not get it in the way we want. We possess the object but we do not derive satisfaction from possessing it. For example, we may dream of becoming wealthy, but if we actually become wealthy our life is not the way we imagined it would be, and we do not feel that we have fulfilled our desire. This is because our desires do not decrease as our wealth increases. The more wealth we have, the more we desire. The wealth we seek is unfindable because we seek an amount that will satiate our desires, and no amount of <a id="_idIndexMarker330"></a>wealth can do that. To make things worse, in obtaining the object of our desire we create new occasions for discontent. With every object we desire come other objects we do not want. For example, with wealth come taxes, insecurity and complicated financial affairs. These unwished for side effects prevent us from ever feeling fully satisfied. Similarly, we may dream of having a holiday in an exotic location, and we may actually go there on holiday, but the experience is never quite what we expect, and with our holiday come other things such as sunburn and great expense.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">If we examine our desires we will see that they are excessive. We want all the best things in samsara – the best job, the best partner, the best reputation, the best house, the best car, the best holiday. Anything that is not the best leaves us with a feeling of disappointment – still searching for but not finding what we want. No <a id="_idIndexMarker331"></a>worldly enjoyment, however, can give us the complete and perfect satisfaction we desire. Better things are always being produced. Everywhere, new advertisements announce that the very best thing has just arrived on the market, but a few days later another best thing arrives that is better than the best thing of a few days ago. There is no end of new things to captivate our desires.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Children at school can never satisfy their own or their parents’ ambitions. Even if they come top of their class they feel they cannot be content unless they do the same the following year. If they go on to be successful in their jobs, their ambitions will be as strong as ever. There is no point at which they can rest, feeling that they are completely satisfied with what they have done.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We may think that at least people who lead a simple life in the country must be content, but if we look at their situation we will find that even farmers search for but do not find what they want. Their lives are full of problems and anxieties, and they do not enjoy real peace and satisfaction. Their livelihoods depend upon many uncertain factors beyond their control, such as the weather. Farmers have no more freedom from discontent than businessmen who live and work in the city. Businessmen look smart and efficient as they set off to work each morning carrying their briefcases but, although they look so smooth on the outside, in their hearts they carry many dissatisfactions. They are still searching for but not finding what they want.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">If we reflect on this situation we may decide that we can find what we are searching for by abandoning all our <a id="_idIndexMarker332"></a>possessions. We can see, however, that even poor people are looking for but not finding what they seek, and many poor people have difficulty in finding the most basic necessities of life; millions of people in the world experience the sufferings of extreme poverty. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We cannot avoid the suffering of <a id="_idIndexMarker333"></a>dissatisfaction by frequently changing our situation. We may think that if we keep getting a new partner or a new job, or keep travelling about, we will eventually find what we want; but even if we were to travel to every place on the globe, and have a new lover in every town, we would still be seeking another place and another lover. In samsara there is no real fulfilment of our desires.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Whenever we see anyone in a high or low position, male or female, they differ only in appearance, dress, behaviour and status. In essence they are all equal – they all experience problems in their lives. Whenever we have a <a id="_idIndexMarker334"></a>problem, it is easy to think that it is caused by our particular circumstances, and that if we were to change our circumstances our problem would disappear. We <a id="_idIndexMarker335"></a>blame other people, our friends, our food, our government, our times, the weather, society, history and so forth. However, <a id="_idIndexMarker336"></a>external circumstances such as these are not the main causes of our problems. We need to recognize that all the physical suffering and mental pain we experience are the consequences of our taking a rebirth that is contaminated by the inner poison of delusions. Human beings have to experience various kinds of human suffering because they have taken a contaminated human rebirth; <a id="_idIndexMarker337"></a>animals have to experience animal <a id="_idIndexMarker338"></a>suffering because they have taken a contaminated animal rebirth; and <a id="_idIndexMarker339"></a>hungry ghosts and <a id="_idIndexMarker340"></a>hell beings have to experience their own sufferings because they have taken contaminated rebirth as hungry ghosts and hell beings. Even <a id="_idIndexMarker341"></a>gods are not free from suffering because they too have taken a contaminated rebirth. Just as a person trapped inside a raging fire develops intense fear, so we should develop intense fear of the unbearable sufferings of the endless cycle of impure life. This fear is also actual renunciation and arises from our wisdom. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">In conclusion, having contemplated the above explanation we should think:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---meditation---single">There is no benefit in denying the sufferings of future lives; when they actually descend upon me it will be too late to protect myself from them. Therefore I definitely need to prepare protection now, while I have this human life that gives me the opportunity to liberate myself permanently from the sufferings of my countless future lives. If I do not apply effort to accomplish this, but allow my human life to become empty of meaning, there is no greater deception and no greater foolishness. I must put effort now into liberating myself permanently from the sufferings of my countless future lives.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We hold this determination firmly and we remain on it single-pointedly for as long as possible. We should practise this meditation continually until we develop the spontaneous wish to liberate ourself permanently from the sufferings of countless future lives<a id="_idIndexMarker342"></a>. This is the actual realization of renunciation<a id="_idIndexMarker343"></a>.<a id="_idIndexMarker344"></a> The moment we develop this realization we enter the path to <a id="_idIndexMarker345"></a>liberation<a id="_idIndexMarker346"></a>. In this context, liberation refers to the supreme permanent peace of mind<a id="_idIndexMarker347"></a> known as ‘nirvana<a id="_idIndexMarker348"></a>’, which gives us pure and everlasting happiness<a id="_idIndexMarker349"></a>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para _idGenParaOverride-1">Once we have attained nirvana, we will never again experience contaminated environments, enjoyments, <a id="_idIndexMarker350"></a>bodies or minds. We will experience everything as pure because our <a id="_idIndexMarker351"></a>mind will have become pure, free from the inner poison of delusions. The first step towards the attainment of nirvana is gaining the realization of <a id="_idIndexMarker352"></a>renunciation, the spontaneous wish to abandon samsara, or contaminated rebirth. We then abandon samsara and attain nirvana by gaining a direct <a id="_idIndexMarker353"></a>realization of emptiness, the <a id="_idIndexMarker354"></a>ultimate nature of phenomena, which will be explained in detail in the chapter <span class="_1---Italic">Ultimate Bodhichitta</span>.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
