<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		<title>How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-24</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
		<link href="css/eBook_CSS_November2016.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-24" lang="en-GB" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<div>
			<p id="_idParaDest-24" class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_00-Chapter-title---TOC-Level-1"><a id="_idTextAnchor022"></a>Ultimate Bodhichitta</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">When we meditate on ultimate truth, or emptiness, motivated by bodhichitta, we are training in ultimate bodhichitta. Actual <a id="_idIndexMarker1435"></a>ultimate bodhichitta is a wisdom that directly realizes emptiness motivated by bodhichitta. It is called ‘ultimate bodhichitta’ because its object is ultimate truth<a id="_idIndexMarker1436"></a>, emptiness, and it is one of the main path<a id="_idIndexMarker1437"></a>s to enlightenment.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">If we do not know the meaning of emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1438"></a> there is no basis for training in ultimate bodhichitta, because emptiness is the object of ultimate bodhichitta. What is the difference between empty and <a id="_idIndexMarker1439"></a>emptiness? In Buddhism, emptiness has great meaning. It is the real nature of things, and is a very profound and meaningful object. If we realize emptiness directly we will attain permanent liberation from all the sufferings of this life and countless future lives; there is no greater meaning than this. So emptiness is a very meaningful object, but an empty is just empty – it has no special meaning. There is an empty of inherent existence, but there is no emptiness of inherent existence because inherent existence itself does not exist.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">Je Tsongkhapa<a id="_idIndexMarker1440"></a> said: </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">The knowledge of emptiness is superior to any other knowledge,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">The Teacher who teaches emptiness unmistakenly is superior to any other teacher,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">And the realization of emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1441"></a> is the very essence of Buddhadharma<a id="_idIndexMarker1442"></a>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">If we really do not wish to experience problems and suffering we must realize emptiness, the selflessness of persons and phenomena. <a id="_idIndexMarker1443"></a>Milarepa’s Guru <a id="_idIndexMarker1444"></a>Marpa Lotsawa said:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">In east India near the river Ganges</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">I met Venerable <a id="_idIndexMarker1445"></a>Maitripa, and through his great kindness</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">I realized that the <a id="_idIndexMarker1446"></a>things that I normally see do not exist.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">Thus, all my experiences of problems and suffering have ceased.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">We should know that since beginningless time our way of <a id="_idIndexMarker1447"></a>identifying ourself has been mistaken. We believe that our self that we normally see is our self. This belief is <a id="_idIndexMarker1448"></a>ignorance because our <a id="_idIndexMarker1449"></a>self that we normally see does not exist. All the things that we normally see do not exist. This will be explained in detail below. Because of this ignorance we develop and experience various kinds of <a id="_idIndexMarker1450"></a>mistaken appearance, and because of this we experience various kinds of <a id="_idIndexMarker1451"></a>suffering and problems as hallucinations throughout this life, and in life after life, endlessly. On the other hand, if we identify our <a id="_idIndexMarker1452"></a>self as a mere appearance that is not other than the emptiness of all phenomena, the mere absence of all phenomena that we normally perceive, our mistaken appearance will reduce and finally cease completely. Then we will experience the supreme happiness of nirvana or <a id="_idIndexMarker1453"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1454"></a>enlightenment.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1">WHAT IS EMPTINESS?</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para"><a id="_idIndexMarker1455"></a>Emptiness is the way things really are. It is the way things exist as opposed to the way they appear. We naturally believe that the things we see around us, such as tables, chairs and houses, are truly existent, because we believe that they exist in exactly the way that they appear. However, the way things appear<a id="_idIndexMarker1456"></a> to our senses is deceptive and completely contradictory to the way in which they actually exist. Things appear to exist from their own side, without depending upon our mind. This book that appears to our mind, for example, seems to have its own independent, objective existence. It seems to be ‘outside’ whereas our mind seems to be ‘inside’. We feel that the book can exist without our mind; we do not feel that our mind is in any way involved in bringing the book into existence. This way of existing independent of our mind is variously called ‘true existence’, ‘inherent existence<a id="_idIndexMarker1457"></a>’, ‘existence from its own side’, and ‘existence from the side of the object’.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para"><a id="_idIndexMarker1458"></a>Although things appear directly to our senses to be truly, or inherently, existent, in reality all <a id="_idIndexMarker1459"></a>phenomena lack, or are empty of, true existence<a id="_idIndexMarker1460"></a>. This book, our body, our friends, we ourself, and the entire universe are in reality just appearances to mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1461"></a>, like things seen in a dream. If we dream<a id="_idIndexMarker1462"></a> of an elephant, the elephant appears vividly in all its detail – we can see it, hear it, smell it and touch it – but when we wake up we realize that it was just an appearance to mind. We do not wonder ‘Where is the elephant now?’, because we understand that it was simply a projection of our <a id="_idIndexMarker1463"></a>mind and had no existence outside our mind. When the dream awareness that apprehended the elephant ceased, the elephant did not go anywhere – it simply disappeared, for it was just an appearance to the mind and did not exist separately from the mind. Buddha said that the same is true for all phenomena; they are mere appearances to mind, totally dependent upon the mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1464"></a>s that perceive them.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">The world we experience when we are awake and the world we experience when we are dreaming are both mere appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1465"></a>s to mind that arise from our mistaken conceptions. If we want to say that the dream<a id="_idIndexMarker1466"></a> world is false, we also have to say that the waking world is false; and if we want to say that the waking world is true, we also have to say that the dream world is true. The only difference between them is that the dream world is an appearance to our subtle dreaming mind whereas the waking world is an appearance to our gross waking mind. The dream world exists only for as long as the dream awareness to which it appears exists, and the waking world<a id="_idIndexMarker1467"></a> exists only for as long as the waking awareness to which it appears exists. Buddha said, ‘You should know that <a id="_idIndexMarker1468"></a>all phenomena<a id="_idIndexMarker1469"></a> are like dreams<a id="_idIndexMarker1470"></a>.’ When we die, our gross waking minds dissolve into our very subtle mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1471"></a> and the world we experienced when we were alive simply disappears. The world as others perceive it will continue, but our personal world will disappear as completely and irrevocably as the world<a id="_idIndexMarker1472"></a> of last night’s dream.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">Buddha also said that all phenomena<a id="_idIndexMarker1473"></a> are like illusions. There are many different types of illusion, such as mirage<a id="_idIndexMarker1474"></a>s, rainbow<a id="_idIndexMarker1475"></a>s or drug-induced hallucinations. In ancient times, there used to be magicians<a id="_idIndexMarker1476"></a> who would cast a spell over their audience, causing them to see objects, such as a piece of wood, as something else, such as a tiger. Those deceived by the spell would see what appeared to be a real tiger and develop fear<a id="_idIndexMarker1477"></a>, but those who arrived after the spell had been cast would simply see a piece of wood. What all illusions have in common is that the way they appear does not coincide with the way they exist. Buddha likened all phenomena to illusions because, through the force of the <a id="_idIndexMarker1478"></a>imprints of self-grasping ignorance accumulated since beginningless time, whatever appears to our mind naturally appears to be truly existent<a id="_idIndexMarker1479"></a> and we instinctively assent to this appearance, but in reality everything is totally empty of true existence. Like a mirage<a id="_idIndexMarker1480"></a> that appears to be water but is not in fact water, things appear<a id="_idIndexMarker1481"></a> in a deceptive way. Not understanding their real nature we are fooled by appearances, and grasp at books and tables, bodies and worlds as truly existent. The result of grasping at phenomena in this way is that we develop self-cherishing<a id="_idIndexMarker1482"></a>, attachment<a id="_idIndexMarker1483"></a>, hatred, jealousy<a id="_idIndexMarker1484"></a> and other delusions<a id="_idIndexMarker1485"></a>, our mind becomes agitated and unbalanced, and our peace of mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1486"></a> is destroyed. We are like travellers in a desert who exhaust themselves running after mirages, or like someone walking down a road at night mistaking the shadows of the trees for criminals or wild animals waiting to attack.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1">THE EMPTINESS OF OUR BODY</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">To understand how phenomena are empty of true, or inherent, existence we should consider our own <a id="_idIndexMarker1487"></a>body. Once we have understood how our body lacks true existence we can easily apply the same reasoning to other objects.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">In <span class="_1---Italic">Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life</span><a id="_idIndexMarker1488"></a> Bodhisattva Shantideva says:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Therefore, there is no body,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But, because of ignorance, we see a body within the hands and so forth,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Just like a mind mistakenly apprehending a person</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">When observing the shape of a pile of stones at dusk.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">On one level we know our body very well – we know whether it is healthy or unhealthy, beautiful or ugly, and so forth. However, we never examine it more deeply, asking ourself, ‘What precisely is my body? Where is my body? What is its real nature?’ If we did examine our body in this way we would not be able to find it – instead of finding our body the result of this examination would be that our body disappears. The meaning of the first part of Shantideva’s verse, ‘Therefore, there is no body’, is that if we search for our ‘real’ body, there is no body; our body exists only if we do not search for a real body behind its mere appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1489"></a>.  </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">There are two ways of searching for an object. An example of the first way, which we can call a ‘conventional search<a id="_idIndexMarker1490"></a>’, is searching for our car in a car park. The conclusion of this type of search is that we find the car, in the sense that we see the thing that everyone agrees is our car. However, having located our car in the car park, suppose we are still not satisfied with the mere appearance of the car and we want to determine exactly what the car is. We might then engage in what we can call an ‘ultimate search<a id="_idIndexMarker1491"></a>’ for the car, in which we look within the object itself to find something that is the object. To do this we ask ourself, ‘Are any of the individual parts of the car, the car? Are the wheels the car? Is the engine the car? Is the chassis the car?’ and so forth. When conducting an ultimate search for our car we are not satisfied with just pointing to the bonnet, wheels and so forth, and then saying ‘car’; we want to know what the car really is. Instead of just using the word ‘car’ as ordinary people do, we want to know what the word really refers to. We want to mentally separate the car from all that is not car, so that we can say ‘This is what the car really is.’ We want to find a car, but in truth there is no car; we can find nothing. In <span class="_1---Italic">Condensed Perfection of Wisdom Sutra</span><a id="_idIndexMarker1492"></a> Buddha<a id="_idIndexMarker1493"></a> says, ‘If you search for your body with wisdom you cannot find it.’ This also applies to our car, our house and all other phenomena. <a id="_idIndexMarker1494"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1495"></a></p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">In<span class="_1---Italic"> Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life</span><a id="_idIndexMarker1496"></a> Shantideva<a id="_idIndexMarker1497"></a> says:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">When examined in this way, </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Who is living and who is it who will die?</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">What is the future and what is the past?</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">Who are our friends and who are our relatives?</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">I beseech you who are just like me,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">Please know that all things are empty, like space.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">The essential meaning of these words is that when we search for things with wisdom, there is no person who is living or dying, there is no past or future, and there is no present, such as our friends and relatives. We should know that all phenomena are empty, like space, which means we should know that all phenomena<a id="_idIndexMarker1498"></a> are not other than emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1499"></a>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">To understand Shantideva’s claim that in reality there is no body, we need to conduct an ultimate search<a id="_idIndexMarker1500"></a> for our body. If we are ordinary beings<a id="_idIndexMarker1501"></a>, all objects, including our body<a id="_idIndexMarker1502"></a>, appear to exist inherent<a id="_idIndexMarker1503"></a>ly. As mentioned above, objects seem to be independent of our mind and independent of other phenomena. The universe appears to consist of discrete objects that have an existence from their own side<a id="_idIndexMarker1504"></a>. These objects appear to exist in themselves as stars, planets, mountains, people and so forth, ‘waiting’ to be experienced by conscious beings. Normally it does not occur to us that we are involved in any way in the existence of these phenomena. For example, we feel that our body exists from its own side and does not depend upon our mind, or anyone else’s, to bring it into existence. However, if our body did exist in the way that we instinctively grasp it – as an external object rather than just a projection of mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1505"></a> – we should be able to point to our body without pointing to any phenomenon that is not our body. We should be able to find it amongst its parts or outside its parts. Since there is no third possibility, if our body cannot be found either amongst its parts or outside its parts we must conclude that our body that we normally see does not exist.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">It is not difficult to understand that the individual parts of our body<a id="_idIndexMarker1506"></a> are not our body – it is absurd to say that our back, our legs, or our head are our body. If one of the parts, say our back, is our body, then the other parts are equally our body, and it would follow that we have many bodies. Furthermore, our back, legs and so forth cannot be our body because they are parts of our body. The body is the part-possessor, and the back, legs and so forth are the possessed parts; and possessor and possessed cannot be one and the same.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Some people believe that although none of the individual parts of the body is the body, the collection of all the parts assembled together is the body. According to them, it is possible to find our body when we search for it analytically because the collection of all the parts of our body is our body. However, this assertion can be refuted with many valid reasons. The force of these reasons may not be immediately obvious to us, but if we contemplate them carefully with a calm and positive mind we will come to appreciate their validity.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Since none of the individual parts of our body is our body, how can the collection of all the parts be our body? For example, a collection of dogs cannot be a human being, because none of the individual dogs is human. As each individual member is ‘non-human’, how can this collection of non-humans magically transform into a human? Similarly, since the collection of the parts of our body is a collection of things that are not our body, it cannot be our body. Just as the collection of dogs remains simply dogs, so the collection of all the parts of our body remains simply parts of our body – it does not magically transform into the part-possessor, our body.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We may find this point difficult to understand, but if we think about it for a long time with a calm and positive mind, and discuss it with more experienced practitioners, it will gradually become clearer. We can also consult authentic books on the subject, such as <span class="_1---Italic">The New Heart of Wisdom</span><a id="_idIndexMarker1507"></a> and <span class="_1---Italic">Ocean of Nectar</span><a id="_idIndexMarker1508"></a>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">There is another way in which we can know that the collection of the parts of our body is not our body. If we can point to the collection of the parts of our body and say that this is, in itself, our body, then the collection of the parts of our body must exist independently of all phenomena that are not our body. Thus it would follow that the collection of the parts of our body exists independently of the parts themselves. This is clearly absurd – if it were true, we could remove all the parts of our body and the collection of the parts would remain. We can therefore conclude that the collection of the parts of our body is not our body.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Since the body cannot be found within its parts, either as an individual part or as the collection, the only possibility that remains is that it exists separately from its parts. If this is the case, it should be possible mentally or physically to remove all the parts of our body and still be left with the body. However, if we remove our arms, our legs, our head, our trunk and all the other parts of our body, no body is left. This proves that there is no body separate from its parts. It is because of <a id="_idIndexMarker1509"></a>ignorance that whenever we point to our body we are pointing only to a part of our body, which is not our body.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We have now searched in every possible place and have been unable to find our body either amongst its parts or anywhere else. We can find nothing that corresponds to the vividly appearing body that we normally grasp at. We are forced to agree with Shantideva<a id="_idIndexMarker1510"></a> that, when we search for our body, there is no body to be found. This clearly proves that our body that we normally see does not exist. It is almost as if our body does not exist at all. Indeed, the only sense in which we can say that our body does exist is if we are satisfied with the mere name<a id="_idIndexMarker1511"></a> ‘body’ and do not expect to find a real body behind the name. If we try to find, or point to, a real body to which the name ‘body’ refers, we will not find anything at all. Instead of finding a truly existent body, we will perceive the mere absence<a id="_idIndexMarker1512"></a> of our body that we normally see. This mere absence of our body that we normally see is the way our body actually exists. We will realize that the body we normally perceive, grasp at and cherish does not exist at all. This non-existence of the body we normally grasp at is the emptiness of our body, the true nature of our body.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">The term ‘<a id="_idIndexMarker1513"></a>true nature’ is very meaningful. Not being satisfied with the mere appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1514"></a> and name ‘body’ we examined our body to discover its true nature. The result of this examination was a definite non-finding<a id="_idIndexMarker1515"></a> of our body. Where we expected to find a truly existent<a id="_idIndexMarker1516"></a> body, we discovered the utter non-existence of that truly existent body. This non-existence, or emptiness, is the true nature of our body<a id="_idIndexMarker1517"></a>. Apart from the mere absence of a truly existent body, there is no other true nature of our body – every other attribute of the body is just part of its deceptive nature. Since this is the case, why do we spend so much time focusing on the deceptive nature<a id="_idIndexMarker1518"></a> of our body? At present we ignore the true nature of our body and other phenomena, and concentrate only on their deceptive nature; yet the result of concentrating all the time on deceptive objects is that our mind becomes disturbed and we remain in the miserable life of samsara<a id="_idIndexMarker1519"></a>. If we wish to experience pure happiness, we must acquaint our mind with the truth. Instead of wasting our energy focusing only on meaningless, deceptive objects, we should focus on the true nature of things.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Although it is impossible to find our body when we search for it analytically, when we do not engage in analysis our body appears very clearly. Why is this? Shantideva<a id="_idIndexMarker1520"></a> says that because of ignorance we see our body within the hands and other parts of our body. In reality, our body does not exist within its parts. Just as at dusk we might see a pile of stones as a man even though there is no man within the stones, so in the same way our ignorant mind sees a body within the collection of arms, legs and so forth, even though no body exists there. The body we see within the collection of arms and legs is simply a hallucination of our ignorant mind. Not recognizing it as such, however, we grasp at it very strongly, cherish it, and exhaust ourself in trying to protect it from any discomfort.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">The way to familiarize our mind with the true nature of the body is to use the above reasoning to search for our body and then, when we have searched in every possible place and not found it, to concentrate on the space-like emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1521"></a> that is the mere absence<a id="_idIndexMarker1522"></a> of the body that we normally see. This space-like emptiness is the true nature of our body. Although it resembles empty space, it is a meaningful emptiness. Its meaning is the utter non-existence of the body that we normally see, the body that we grasp at so strongly and have cherished all our life.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Through becoming familiar with the experience of the space-like ultimate nature of the body, our grasping at our body will be reduced. As a result we will experience far less suffering, anxiety and frustration in relation to our body. Our physical tension will diminish and our health will improve, and even when we do become sick our physical discomfort will not disturb our mind. Those who have a direct experience of emptiness do not feel any pain even if they are beaten or shot. Knowing that the real nature of their body is like space, for them being beaten is like space being beaten and being shot is like space being shot. Moreover, good and bad external conditions no longer have the power to disturb their mind, because they realize them to be like a magician’s illusion<a id="_idIndexMarker1523"></a>, with no existence separate from the mind. Instead of being pulled about by changing conditions like a puppet on a string, their minds remain free and tranquil in the knowledge of the equal and unchanging ultimate nature<a id="_idIndexMarker1524"></a> of all things. In this way, a person who <a id="_idIndexMarker1525"></a>directly realizes emptiness, the true nature<a id="_idIndexMarker1526"></a> of phenomena, experiences peace and happiness day and night, life after life.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We need to distinguish between the conventionally existent body<a id="_idIndexMarker1527"></a> that does exist and the inherently existent <a id="_idIndexMarker1528"></a>body<a id="_idIndexMarker1529"></a> that does not exist; but we must take care not to be misled by the words into thinking that the conventionally existent body is anything more than a mere appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1530"></a> to mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1531"></a>. It is perhaps less confusing simply to say that for a mind that directly sees the <a id="_idIndexMarker1532"></a>truth, or <a id="_idIndexMarker1533"></a>emptiness, there is no body. A body exists only for an ordinary mind to which a body appears.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Shantideva<a id="_idIndexMarker1534"></a> advises us that unless we wish to understand emptiness we should not examine conventional truth<a id="_idIndexMarker1535"></a>s such as our body, possessions, places and friends, but instead be satisfied with their mere name<a id="_idIndexMarker1536"></a>s, as are worldly<a id="_idIndexMarker1537"></a> people. Once a worldly person knows an object’s name and purpose he is satisfied that he knows the object and does not investigate further. We must do the same, unless we want to meditate on emptiness. However, we should remember that if we did examine objects more closely we would not find<a id="_idIndexMarker1538"></a> them, for they would simply disappear, just as a mirage<a id="_idIndexMarker1539"></a> disappears if we try to look for it.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">The same reasoning that we have used to prove the lack of true existence of our body can be applied to all other phenomena. This book, for example, seems to exist from its own side, somewhere within its parts; but when we examine the book more precisely we discover that none of the individual pages nor the collection of the pages is the book, yet without them there is no book. Instead of finding a truly existent<a id="_idIndexMarker1540"></a> book we are left beholding an emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1541"></a> that is the non-existence of the book we previously held to exist. Because of our ignorance the book appears to exist separately from our mind, as if our mind were inside and the book outside, but through analyzing the book we discover that this appearance is completely false. There is no book outside the mind. There is no book ‘out there’, within the pages. The only way the book exists is as a mere appearance to mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1542"></a>, a mere projection of the mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1543"></a>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">All phenomena<a id="_idIndexMarker1544"></a> exist by way of convention<a id="_idIndexMarker1545"></a>; nothing is <a id="_idIndexMarker1546"></a>inherently existent. This applies to mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1547"></a>, to Buddha<a id="_idIndexMarker1548"></a>, and even to emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1549"></a> itself. Everything is merely imputed<a id="_idIndexMarker1550"></a> by <a id="_idIndexMarker1551"></a>mind. All phenomena have parts – physical phenomena have physical parts, and non-physical phenomena have various parts, or attributes, that can be distinguished by thought. Using the same type of reasoning as above, we can realize that any phenomenon is not one of its parts, not the collection of its parts, and not separate from its parts. In this way we can realize the emptiness of all phenomena, the mere absence<a id="_idIndexMarker1552"></a> of all phenomena that we normally see or perceive.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">It is particularly helpful to meditate on the emptiness of objects that arouse in us strong delusions<a id="_idIndexMarker1553"></a> like attachment<a id="_idIndexMarker1554"></a> or anger<a id="_idIndexMarker1555"></a>. By analyzing correctly we will realize that the object we desire, or the object we dislike, does not exist from its own side. Its beauty or ugliness, and even its very existence, are imputed by mind. By thinking in this way we will discover that there is no basis for attachment or anger.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1"><a id="_idIndexMarker1556"></a>THE EMPTINESS OF OUR MIND</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">In <span class="_1---Italic">Training the Mind in Seven Points</span><a id="_idIndexMarker1557"></a>, after outlining how to engage in analytical meditation on the emptiness of inherent existence of outer phenomena such as our body, <a id="_idIndexMarker1558"></a>Geshe Chekhawa continues by saying that we should then analyze our own mind to understand how it lacks inherent existence.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Our mind is not an independent entity, but an ever-changing continuum that depends upon many factors, such as its previous moments, its objects, and the inner energy winds upon which our minds are mounted. Like everything else, our mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1559"></a> is imputed<a id="_idIndexMarker1560"></a> upon a collection of many factors and therefore lacks inherent existence. A primary mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1561"></a>, or consciousness<a id="_idIndexMarker1562"></a>, for example, has five parts or ‘mental factors’: feeling<a id="_idIndexMarker1563"></a>, discrimination<a id="_idIndexMarker1564"></a>, intention<a id="_idIndexMarker1565"></a>, contact<a id="_idIndexMarker1566"></a> and attention<a id="_idIndexMarker1567"></a>. Neither the individual mental factors nor the collection of these mental factors is the primary mind itself, because they are mental factors and therefore parts of the primary mind. However, there is no primary mind that is separate from these mental factors. A primary mind is merely imputed upon the mental factors that are its basis of imputation, and therefore it does not exist from its own side.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">Having identified the nature of our primary mind, which is an empty like space that perceives or understands objects, we then search for it within its parts – feeling, discrimination, intention, contact and attention – until finally we realize its unfindability<a id="_idIndexMarker1568"></a>. This unfindability is its ultimate nature<a id="_idIndexMarker1569"></a>, or emptiness. We then think:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---meditation---single">All phenomena that appear to my mind are the nature of my mind. My mind is the nature of emptiness.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para---full-space-below">In this way we feel that everything dissolves into emptiness. We perceive only the emptiness of all phenomena<a id="_idIndexMarker1570"></a> and we meditate on this emptiness. This way of meditating on emptiness is more profound than the meditation on the emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1571"></a> of our body. Gradually our experience of emptiness will become clearer and clearer until finally we gain an undefiled wisdom that directly realizes the emptiness of all phenomena.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1"><a id="_idIndexMarker1572"></a>THE EMPTINESS OF OUR I</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">The object we grasp at most strongly is our self or I. Due to the imprints of <a id="_idIndexMarker1573"></a>self-grasping ignorance<a id="_idIndexMarker1574"></a> accumulated over time without beginning, our I appears to us as inherently existent, and our self-grasping mind automatically grasps at it in this way. Although we grasp at an <a id="_idIndexMarker1575"></a>inherently existent I all the time, even during sleep, it is not easy to identify how it appears to our mind. To identify it clearly, we must begin by allowing it to manifest strongly by contemplating situations in which we have an exaggerated sense of I, such as when we are embarrassed, ashamed, afraid or indignant. We recall or imagine such a situation and then, without any comment or analysis, try to gain a clear mental image of how the I naturally appears at such times. We have to be patient at this stage because it may take many sessions before we gain a clear image. Eventually we will see that the I appears to be completely solid and real, existing from its own side<a id="_idIndexMarker1576"></a> without depending upon the body or the mind. This vividly appearing I is the inherently existent I that we cherish so strongly. It is the I that we defend when we are criticized and that we are so proud of when we are praised.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Once we have an image of how the I appears in these extreme circumstances, we should try to identify how it appears normally, in less extreme situations. For example, we can observe the I that is presently reading this book and try to discover how it appears to our mind. Eventually we will see that although in this case there is not such an inflated sense of I, nevertheless the I still appears to be inherently existent, existing from its own side without depending upon the body or the mind. Once we have an image of the inherently existent I, we focus on it for a while with single-pointed concentration. Then in meditation we proceed to the next stage, which is to contemplate valid reasons to prove that the inherently existent I we are grasping at does not in fact exist. The <a id="_idIndexMarker1577"></a>inherently existent I and our <a id="_idIndexMarker1578"></a>self that we normally see are the same; we should know that neither exists, both are <a id="_idIndexMarker1579"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1580"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1581"></a>objects negated by emptiness.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">If the I exists in the way that it appears, it must exist in one of four ways: as the body, as the mind, as the collection of the body and mind, or as something separate from the body and mind; there is no other possibility. We contemplate this carefully until we become convinced that this is the case and then we proceed to examine each of the four possibilities:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text-list-1-to-9-with-parenthesis---middle-justify">(1)&#9;If our I is our body, there is no sense in saying ‘my body’, because the possessor and the possessed are identical.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text-list-1-to-9-with-parenthesis---2nd-para-justify">If our I is our body, there is no future rebirth because the I ceases when the body dies.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text-list-1-to-9-with-parenthesis---2nd-para-justify">If our I and our body are identical, then since we are capable of developing faith, dreaming, solving mathematical puzzles and so on, it follows that flesh, blood and bones can do the same.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text-list-1-to-9-with-parenthesis---2nd-para-justify-space-after">Since none of this is true, it follows that our I is not our body.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text-list-1-to-9-with-parenthesis---middle-justify">(2)&#9;If our I is our mind, there is no sense in saying ‘my mind’, because the possessor and the possessed are identical; but usually when we focus on our mind we say ‘my mind’. This clearly indicates that our I is not our mind.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text-list-1-to-9-with-parenthesis---2nd-para-justify-space-after">If our I is our mind, then since we have many types of mind, such as the six consciousnesses, conceptual minds and non-conceptual minds, it follows that we have just as many I’s. Since this is absurd, our I cannot be our mind.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text-list-1-to-9-with-parenthesis---end-justify">(3)&#9;Since our body is not our I and our mind is not our I, the collection of our body and mind cannot be our I. The collection of our body and mind is a collection of things that are not our I, so how can the collection itself be our I? For example, in a herd of cows none of the animals is a sheep, therefore the herd itself is not sheep. In the same way, in the collection of our body and mind, neither our body nor our mind is our I, therefore the collection itself is not our I.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text-list-1-to-9-with-parenthesis---middle-justify">(4)&#9;If our I is not our body, not our mind, and not the collection of our body and mind, the only possibility that remains is that it is something separate from our body and mind. If this is the case, we must be able to apprehend our I without either our body or our mind appearing, but if we imagine that our body and our mind were completely to disappear there would be nothing remaining that could be called our I. Therefore it follows that our I is not separate from our body and mind.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text-list-1-to-9-with-parenthesis---2nd-para-justify-space-after">We should imagine that our body gradually dissolves into thin air, and then our mind dissolves, our thoughts scatter with the wind, our feelings, wishes and awareness melt into nothingness<a id="_idIndexMarker1582"></a>. Is there anything left that is our I? There is nothing. Clearly, our I is not something separate from our body and mind.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We have now examined all four possibilities and have failed to find our I or self. Since we have already decided that there is no fifth possibility, we must conclude that our I that we normally grasp at and cherish does not exist at all. Where there previously appeared an <a id="_idIndexMarker1583"></a>inherently existent I, there now appears an absence of that I. This absence of an inherently existent I is emptiness, ultimate truth.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We contemplate in this way until there appears to us a <a id="_idIndexMarker1584"></a>generic<a id="_idIndexMarker1585"></a>, or mental, image of the absence <a id="_idIndexMarker1586"></a>of our self that we normally see. This image is our object of placement meditation. We try to become completely familiar with it by continually meditating on it single-pointedly for as long as possible.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Because we have grasped at our inherently existent I since beginningless time<a id="_idIndexMarker1587"></a>, and have cherished it more dearly than anything else, the experience of failing to find<a id="_idIndexMarker1588"></a> our self in meditation can be quite shocking at first. Some people develop fear<a id="_idIndexMarker1589"></a>, thinking ‘I have become completely non-existent.’ Others feel great joy, as if the source of all their problems were vanishing. Both reactions are good signs and indicate correct meditation. After a while these initial reactions will subside and our mind will settle into a more balanced state. Then we will be able to meditate on the <a id="_idIndexMarker1590"></a>emptiness of our self in a calm, controlled manner.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We should allow our mind to become absorbed in space-like emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1591"></a> for as long as possible. It is important to remember that our object of meditation is emptiness, the mere absence of our self that we normally see, not mere nothingness<a id="_idIndexMarker1592"></a>. Occasionally we should check our meditation with <a id="_idIndexMarker1593"></a>alertness. If our mind has wandered to another object, or if we have lost the meaning of emptiness and are focusing on mere nothingness, we should return to the contemplations to bring the emptiness of our self clearly to mind once again.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">We may wonder, ‘If my self that I normally see does not exist, then who is meditating? Who will get up from meditation, speak to others, and reply when my name is called?’ Although our <a id="_idIndexMarker1594"></a>self that we normally see does not exist, this does not mean that our self does not exist at all. We exist as mere name<a id="_idIndexMarker1595"></a>. So long as we are satisfied with the mere name ‘ourself’, there is no problem. We can think ‘I exist’, ‘I am going to town’, and so on. The problem arises only when we look for our self other than the mere name  ‘I’, or ‘self’. Our<a id="_idIndexMarker1596"></a> mind grasps at an I that ultimately exists, independently of conceptual imputation, as if there were a ‘real’ I existing behind the label. If such an I existed we would be able to find it, but we have seen that our I cannot be found upon investigation. The conclusion of our search was a definite non-finding of our self. This unfindability<a id="_idIndexMarker1597"></a> of our self is the emptiness of our self, the <a id="_idIndexMarker1598"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1599"></a>ultimate nature of our self. Our self that exists as mere name is our <a id="_idIndexMarker1600"></a>existent self. In the same way, phenomena that exist as <a id="_idIndexMarker1601"></a>mere name or mere imputation are existent phenomena. There are no self and other phenomena that exist other than mere imputation. In truth, our self and other phenomena existing as mere imputation is the <a id="_idIndexMarker1602"></a>ultimate nature of our self and other phenomena, not the <a id="_idIndexMarker1603"></a>conventional nature. At first these explanations are difficult to understand, but please be patient. We should apply effort to receive the powerful blessings of Wisdom Buddha <a id="_idIndexMarker1604"></a>Je Tsongkhapa through sincerely engaging in the practice of <a id="_idIndexMarker1605"></a><span class="_1---Italic">Heart Jewel</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">When we first realize emptiness we do so conceptually, by means of a <a id="_idIndexMarker1606"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1607"></a>generic image. By continuing to meditate on emptiness over and over again, the generic image gradually becomes more and more transparent until it disappears entirely and we see emptiness directly. This direct realization of <a id="_idIndexMarker1608"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1609"></a>emptiness will be our first completely non-mistaken awareness, or undefiled mind. Until we realize emptiness directly, all our minds are mistaken awarenesse<a id="_idIndexMarker1610"></a>s because, due to the <a id="_idIndexMarker1611"></a>imprints of self-grasping<a id="_idIndexMarker1612"></a> or <a id="_idIndexMarker1613"></a>true-grasping ignorance, their objects appear as inherently existent.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Most people veer towards the extreme of existence<a id="_idIndexMarker1614"></a>, thinking that if something exists it must exist inherently, thus exaggerating the way in which things exist without being satisfied with them as mere name<a id="_idIndexMarker1615"></a>. Others may veer towards the extreme of non-existence, thinking that if phenomena do not exist inherently they do not exist at all, thus exaggerating their lack of inherent existence. We need to realize that although <a id="_idIndexMarker1616"></a>phenomena lack any trace of existence from their own side<a id="_idIndexMarker1617"></a>, they do exist conventionally as mere appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1618"></a>s to a valid mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1619"></a>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">The conceptual mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1620"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1621"></a>s grasping at our I and other phenomena as being truly existent are wrong awarenesses and should therefore be abandoned, but I am not saying that all conceptual thoughts are wrong awarenesse<a id="_idIndexMarker1622"></a>s and should therefore be abandoned. There are many correct conceptual minds that are useful in our day-to-day lives, such as the conceptual mind remembering what we did yesterday or the conceptual mind understanding what we will do tomorrow. There are also many conceptual minds that need to be cultivated on the spiritual path. For example, conventional bodhichitta in the mental continuum of a <a id="_idIndexMarker1623"></a>Bodhisattva is a conceptual mind because it apprehends its object, great enlightenment, by means of a generic image. Moreover, before we can realize emptiness directly with a <a id="_idIndexMarker1624"></a>non-conceptual mind, we need to realize it by means of a subsequent valid cognizer<a id="_idIndexMarker1625"></a>, which is a conceptual mind. Through contemplating the reasons that refute inherent existence, there appears to our mind a <a id="_idIndexMarker1626"></a>generic image of the absence, or empty, of inherent existence. This is the only way that emptiness can initially appear to our mind. We then meditate on this image with stronger and stronger concentration until finally we perceive emptiness directly.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">There are some people who say that the way to meditate on emptiness is simply to empty our mind of all <a id="_idIndexMarker1627"></a>conceptual thoughts, arguing that just as white clouds obscure the sun as much as black clouds, so positive conceptual thoughts obscure our mind as much as negative conceptual thoughts. This view is completely mistaken, for if we make no effort to gain a conceptual understanding of emptiness, but try instead to suppress all conceptual thoughts, actual emptiness will never appear to our mind. We may achieve a vivid experience of a space-like vacuity, but this is just the absence of conceptual thought – it is not emptiness, the true nature<a id="_idIndexMarker1628"></a> of phenomena. Meditation on this vacuity may temporarily calm our mind, but it will never destroy our delusions<a id="_idIndexMarker1629"></a> nor liberate us from samsara<a id="_idIndexMarker1630"></a> and its sufferings.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1">THE <a id="_idIndexMarker1631"></a>EMPTINESS OF PHENOMENA</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">All <a id="_idIndexMarker1632"></a>phenomena are included within eight, which are: <a id="_idIndexMarker1633"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1634"></a>production, <a id="_idIndexMarker1635"></a>disintegration, <a id="_idIndexMarker1636"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1637"></a>impermanence, <a id="_idIndexMarker1638"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1639"></a>permanence, going, <a id="_idIndexMarker1640"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1641"></a>coming, <a id="_idIndexMarker1642"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1643"></a>singularity, and <a id="_idIndexMarker1644"></a>plurality. We should know that all these eight phenomena that we normally see do not actually exist because if we search for them with wisdom they will disappear. However, these phenomena appear clearly to us due to other causes and conditions. For example, if all the necessary atmospheric causes and conditions come together, clouds will appear. If these are absent, clouds cannot appear. The clouds appearing completely depend upon causes and conditions; without these they have no power to appear. The same is true for the appearance of mountains, planets, bodies, minds and all other phenomena. Because their appearance depends upon factors outside themselves for their existence, they are empty of inherent, or independent, existence and are mere imputation<a id="_idIndexMarker1645"></a>s of the <a id="_idIndexMarker1646"></a>mind.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Contemplating the teachings on <a id="_idIndexMarker1647"></a>karma – actions and their effects – can help us to understand this. Where do all our good and bad experiences come from? They are in truth the result of the positive and negative actions we created in the past. As a result of positive actions, attractive and agreeable people appear in our life, pleasant material conditions arise and we live in a beautiful environment; but as a result of negative actions, unpleasant people and things appear. This world is the effect of the collective actions created by the beings who inhabit it. Because actions originate in the mind – specifically in our mental <a id="_idIndexMarker1648"></a>actions – we can see that all worlds arise from the <a id="_idIndexMarker1649"></a>mind. This is similar to the way in which <a id="_idIndexMarker1650"></a>appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1651"></a>s arise in a dream<a id="_idIndexMarker1652"></a>. Everything we perceive when we are dreaming is the result of the ripening of karmic potentials in our mind and has no existence outside of our mind. When our mind is calm and pure, positive <a id="_idIndexMarker1653"></a>karmic <a id="_idIndexMarker1654"></a>imprints ripen and pleasant dream appearances arise; but when our mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1655"></a> is agitated and impure, negative karmic imprints ripen and unpleasant, nightmarish appearances arise. In a similar way, all the appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1656"></a>s of our waking world<a id="_idIndexMarker1657"></a> are simply the ripening of positive, negative or neutral karmic imprints in our mind.<a id="_idIndexMarker1658"></a></p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Once we understand how things arise from their inner and outer causes and conditions and have no independent existence, then just seeing or thinking about the production of phenomena will remind us of their emptiness. Instead of reinforcing our sense of the solidity and objectivity of things, we will begin to see things as manifestations of their emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1659"></a>, with no more concrete existence than a <a id="_idIndexMarker1660"></a>rainbow<a id="_idIndexMarker1661"></a> arising out of an empty sky.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Just as the production of things depends upon causes and conditions, so too does the disintegration of things. Therefore, neither production nor disintegration can be truly existent<a id="_idIndexMarker1662"></a>. For example, if our new car<a id="_idIndexMarker1663"></a> were destroyed we would feel unhappy because we grasp at both the car and the disintegration of the car as truly existent; but if we understood that our car is merely an appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1664"></a> to our mind, like a car in a dream<a id="_idIndexMarker1665"></a>, its destruction would not disturb us. This is true for all objects of our attachment<a id="_idIndexMarker1666"></a>: if we realize that both objects and their cessations lack true existence, there is no basis for becoming upset if we are separated from them.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">All functioning thing<a id="_idIndexMarker1667"></a>s – our environments, enjoyments, body, mind and our self – change from moment to moment. They are <a id="_idIndexMarker1668"></a>impermanent<a id="_idIndexMarker1669"></a> in the sense that they do not last for a second moment. The book you are reading in this moment is not the same book that you were reading a moment ago, and it could only come into existence because the book of a moment ago ceased to exist. When we understand subtle impermanence<a id="_idIndexMarker1670"></a> – that our body, our mind, our self and so forth do not abide for a second moment – it is not difficult to understand that they are empty of inherent existence.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Even though we may agree that <a id="_idIndexMarker1671"></a>impermanent phenomena are empty of inherent existence, we might think that because permanent phenomena<a id="_idIndexMarker1672"></a> are unchanging and do not arise from causes and conditions, they must exist inherently. However, even <a id="_idIndexMarker1673"></a>permanent phenomena such as emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1674"></a> and unproduced space<a id="_idIndexMarker1675"></a> – the mere absence<a id="_idIndexMarker1676"></a> of physical obstruction – are dependent-related phenomena because they depend upon their parts, their bases and the minds that impute them; and therefore they are not inherently existent. Although emptiness is ultimate reality, it is not independent or inherently existent for it too depends upon its parts, its bases and the minds that impute it. Just as a gold coin does not exist separately from its gold, so the emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1677"></a> of our body does not exist separately from our body, because it is simply our body’s lack of inherent existence.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para"><a id="_idIndexMarker1678"></a>Whenever we go anywhere we develop the thought ‘I am going’, and grasp at an inherently existent act of going. In a similar way, when someone comes to visit us we think ‘They are <a id="_idIndexMarker1679"></a>coming’, and we grasp at an inherently existent act of coming. Both these conceptions are self-grasping and wrong awarenesse<a id="_idIndexMarker1680"></a>s. When someone goes away we feel that a truly existent person has truly left, and when they come back we feel that a truly existent person has truly returned. However, the coming and going of people is like the appearance and disappearance of a <a id="_idIndexMarker1681"></a>rainbow<a id="_idIndexMarker1682"></a> in the sky. When the causes and conditions for a rainbow to appear are assembled a rainbow appears, and when the causes and conditions for the continued appearance of the rainbow disperse the rainbow disappears; but the rainbow does not come from anywhere, nor does it go anywhere.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When we observe one object, such as our I, we strongly feel that it is a single, indivisible entity, and that its <a id="_idIndexMarker1683"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1684"></a>singularity is inherently existent. In reality, however, our I has many parts, such as the parts that look, listen, walk and think, or the parts that are, for example, a teacher, a mother, a daughter and a wife. Our I<a id="_idIndexMarker1685"></a> is imputed upon the collection of all these parts. As with each individual phenomenon it is a singularity, but its singularity is merely imputed, like an army that is merely imputed<a id="_idIndexMarker1686"></a> upon a collection of soldiers, or a forest that is imputed upon a collection of trees.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When we see more than one object, we regard the multiplicity of these objects to be inherently existent. However, just as singularity is merely imputed, likewise <a id="_idIndexMarker1687"></a>plurality is just an imputation by mind and does not exist from the side of the object. For example, instead of looking at a collection of soldiers or trees from the point of view of the individual soldiers or trees, we could look at them as an army or a forest, that is, as a singular collection or whole, in which case we would be looking at a singularity rather than a plurality.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">In summary, singularity does not exist from its own side because it is just imputed upon a plurality – its parts. In the same way, plurality does not exist from its own side because it is just imputed upon a singularity – the collection of its parts. Therefore singularity and plurality are mere imputations by conceptual mind and they lack true existence. If we realize this clearly, there is no basis for developing attachment and anger towards objects, either singular or plural. We tend to project the faults or qualities of the few onto the many, and then develop hatred or attachment on the basis of, for example, race, religion or country. Contemplating the emptiness of singularity and plurality can be helpful in reducing such <a id="_idIndexMarker1688"></a>hatred and attachment<a id="_idIndexMarker1689"></a>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para"><a id="_idIndexMarker1690"></a>Although production, disintegration and so forth do exist, they do not exist inherently. It is our conceptual mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1691"></a>s of self-grasping ignorance that grasp them as inherently existent. These conceptions grasp at the eight <a id="_idIndexMarker1692"></a>extremes: inherently existent production, inherently existent<a id="_idIndexMarker1693"></a> disintegration, inherently existent impermanence, inherently existent permanence, inherently existent going, inherently existent coming, inherently existent singularity and inherently existent plurality. These extremes are non-existent because they are extreme, something which is created and exaggerated by <a id="_idIndexMarker1694"></a>mistaken view. Our mind that believes and grasps at inherently existent production and so forth is <a id="_idIndexMarker1695"></a>extreme view. Since beginningless time, in life after life, because of following this extreme view we have experienced immense problems and suffering endlessly. Now is the time to stop all these problems and suffering permanently, by realizing directly that the production, disintegration, impermanence, permanence, going, coming, singularity and plurality that we normally perceive do not exist. Although these extremes do not exist, because of our ignorance we are always grasping them. The conceptions of these extremes lie at the root of all other delusions<a id="_idIndexMarker1696"></a>, and because delusions give rise to our performing contaminated actions<a id="_idIndexMarker1697"></a> that keep us trapped in the prison of samsara<a id="_idIndexMarker1698"></a>, these conceptions are the root of samsara, the cycle of impure life.  </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Inherently existent production is the same as the production that we normally see, and we should know that in reality neither of these exists. This is the same for the remaining seven extremes. For example, inherently existent disintegration and destruction and the disintegration and destruction that we normally see are the same, and we should know that neither of these exists. Our minds that grasp at these eight extremes are our <a id="_idIndexMarker1699"></a>self-grasping of phenomena. Because it is our self-grasping ignorance that causes us to experience endless suffering<a id="_idIndexMarker1700"></a> and problems, when this ignorance ceases permanently through meditation on the emptiness of all phenomena, all our suffering of this life and countless future lives<a id="_idIndexMarker1701"></a> will cease permanently and we will accomplish the real meaning of human life.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">The subject of the eight extremes is profound and requires detailed explanation and lengthy study. Buddha explains them in detail in the <span class="_1---Italic">Perfection of Wisdom Sutras</span><a id="_idIndexMarker1702"></a>; and in <span class="_1---Italic">Fundamental Wisdom</span><span class="_1---Italic"><a id="_idIndexMarker1703"></a></span>, a commentary to the <span class="_1---Italic">Perfection of Wisdom Sutras</span>, Nagarjuna<a id="_idIndexMarker1704"></a> also uses many profound and powerful reasons to prove that the eight extremes do not exist by showing how all phenomena are empty of inherent existence. Through analyzing conventional truths he establishes their ultimate nature<a id="_idIndexMarker1705"></a>, and shows why it is necessary to understand both the conventional and ultimate natures of an object in order to understand that object fully.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1"><a id="_idIndexMarker1706"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1707"></a>CONVENTIONAL AND ULTIMATE TRUTHS</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">In general, whatever exists is either a conventional truth or an ultimate truth, and, since ultimate truth refers just to emptiness, everything except emptiness is a conventional truth. For example, things such as houses, cars and tables are all conventional truths.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">All conventional truths are false objects<a id="_idIndexMarker1708"></a> because the way they appear and the way they exist do not correspond. If someone appears to be friendly and kind but his real intention<a id="_idIndexMarker1709"></a> is to gain our confidence in order to rob us, we would say that he is false or deceptive because there is a discrepancy between the way he appears<a id="_idIndexMarker1710"></a> and his real nature. Similarly, objects such as forms and sounds are false or deceptive because they appear to exist inherently<a id="_idIndexMarker1711"></a> but in reality are completely devoid of inherent existence. Because the way they appear does not coincide with the way they exist, conventional truth<a id="_idIndexMarker1712"></a>s are known as ‘<a id="_idIndexMarker1713"></a>deceptive phenomena’. A cup, for instance, appears to exist independently of its parts, its causes and the mind that apprehends it, but in reality it totally depends upon these things. Because the way the cup appears to our mind and the way it exists do not correspond, the cup is a false object.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Although conventional truths are false objects, nevertheless they actually exist because a mind directly perceiving a conventional truth is a valid mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1714"></a>, a completely reliable mind. For instance, an eye consciousness directly perceiving a cup on the table is a valid mind because it will not deceive us – if we reach out to pick up the cup we will find it where our eye consciousness sees it. In this respect, an eye consciousness perceiving a cup on the table is different from an eye consciousness mistaking a cup reflected in a mirror for a real cup, or an eye consciousness seeing a mirage<a id="_idIndexMarker1715"></a> as water. Even though a cup is a false object, for practical purposes the eye consciousness that directly perceives it is a valid, reliable mind. However, although it is a valid mind it is nevertheless a mistaken awareness<a id="_idIndexMarker1716"></a> insofar as the cup appears to that mind to be truly existent<a id="_idIndexMarker1717"></a>. It is valid and non-deceptive with respect to the conventional characteristics of the cup – its position, size, colour and so forth – but mistaken with respect to its appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1718"></a>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">To summarize, conventional objects are false because, although they appear to exist from their own side<a id="_idIndexMarker1719"></a>, in reality they are mere appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1720"></a>s to mind, like things seen in a dream<a id="_idIndexMarker1721"></a>. Within the context of a dream, however, dream objects have a relative validity, and this distinguishes them from things that do not exist at all. Suppose in a dream we steal<a id="_idIndexMarker1722"></a> a diamond and someone then asks us whether it was we who stole it. Even though the dream is merely a creation of our mind, if we answer ‘yes’ we are telling the truth whereas if we answer ‘no’ we are telling a lie. In the same way, even though in reality the whole universe is just an appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1723"></a> to mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1724"></a>, within the context of the experience of ordinary beings<a id="_idIndexMarker1725"></a> we can distinguish between relative truths and relative falsities<a id="_idIndexMarker1726"></a>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Conventional truths can be divided into gross conventional truth<a id="_idIndexMarker1727"></a>s and subtle conventional truths. We can understand how all phenomena have these two levels of conventional truth by considering the example of a car<a id="_idIndexMarker1728"></a>. The car itself, the car depending on its causes, and the car depending on its parts are all gross conventional truths of the car. They are called ‘gross’ because they are relatively easy to understand. The car depending on its basis of <a id="_idIndexMarker1729"></a>imputation<a id="_idIndexMarker1730"></a> is quite subtle and is not easy to understand, but it is still a gross conventional truth. The basis of imputation of the car is the parts of the car. To apprehend car, the parts of the car must appear to our mind; without the parts appearing, there is no way to develop the thought ‘car’. For this reason, the parts are the basis of imputation of the car. We say ‘I see a car’, but strictly speaking all we ever see is parts of the car. However, when we develop the thought ‘car’ by seeing its parts, we see the car. There is no car other than its parts, there is no body other than its parts, and so on. The car existing merely as an imputation by thought is the subtle conventional truth of the car. We have understood this when we realize that the car is nothing more than a mere imputation by a valid mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1731"></a>. We cannot understand subtle conventional truths unless we have understood emptiness. When we thoroughly realize subtle conventional truth we have realized both conventional truth and ultimate truth.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Strictly speaking, <a id="_idIndexMarker1732"></a>truth, <a id="_idIndexMarker1733"></a>ultimate truth and emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1734"></a> are synonymous because conventional truths are not real truths but false objects<a id="_idIndexMarker1735"></a>. They are true only for the minds of those who have not realized emptiness. Only emptiness is true because only emptiness exists in the way that it appears. When the mind of any sentient being directly perceives conventional truths, such as forms, they appear to exist from their own side<a id="_idIndexMarker1736"></a>. When the mind of a <a id="_idIndexMarker1737"></a>Superior being, a being who has realized emptiness directly, directly perceives emptiness, however, nothing appears other than emptiness; this mind is totally mixed with the mere absence<a id="_idIndexMarker1738"></a> of inherently existent phenomena. The way in which emptiness appears to the mind of a non-conceptual <a id="_idIndexMarker1739"></a>direct perceiver<a id="_idIndexMarker1740"></a> corresponds exactly to the way in which emptiness exists.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">It should be noted that although emptiness is ultimate truth it is not inherently existent. Emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1741"></a> is not a separate reality existing behind conventional appearances, but the real nature of those appearances. We cannot talk about emptiness in isolation, for emptiness is always the mere lack of inherent existence of something. For example, the emptiness of our body is the lack of inherent existence of our body, and without our body as its basis this emptiness cannot exist. Because emptiness necessarily depends upon a basis, it lacks inherent existence.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">In<a id="_idIndexMarker1742"></a> <span class="_1---Italic">Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life</span> Shantideva defines <a id="_idIndexMarker1743"></a>ultimate truth as a phenomenon that is true for the uncontaminated mind of a Superior being. An uncontaminated mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1744"></a> is a mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1745"></a> that realizes emptiness directly. This mind is the only unmistaken awareness<a id="_idIndexMarker1746"></a> and is possessed exclusively by Superior beings. Because uncontaminated minds are completely unmistaken, anything directly perceived by them to be true is necessarily an ultimate truth. In contrast, anything that is directly perceived to be true by the mind of an <a id="_idIndexMarker1747"></a>ordinary being<a id="_idIndexMarker1748"></a>, a being who has not realized emptiness directly, is necessarily not an ultimate truth, because all minds of ordinary beings are mistaken, and mistaken minds can never directly perceive the truth.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Because of the imprints<a id="_idIndexMarker1749"></a> of conceptual thought<a id="_idIndexMarker1750"></a>s that grasp at the eight extremes<a id="_idIndexMarker1751"></a>, everything that appears to the minds of ordinary beings appears to be inherently existent. Only the wisdom<a id="_idIndexMarker1752"></a> of meditative equipoise that <a id="_idIndexMarker1753"></a>directly realizes emptiness is undefiled by the imprints, or stains, of these conceptual thoughts. This is the only wisdom that has no mistaken <a id="_idIndexMarker1754"></a>appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1755"></a>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When a Superior <a id="_idIndexMarker1756"></a>Bodhisattva, a Bodhisattva who has realized emptiness directly, meditates on emptiness his or her mind mixes with emptiness completely, with no appearance of inherent existence. He develops a completely pure, uncontaminated wisdom that is <a id="_idIndexMarker1757"></a>ultimate bodhichitta. When he rises from meditative equipoise<a id="_idIndexMarker1758"></a>, however, because of the <a id="_idIndexMarker1759"></a>imprints of true-grasping<a id="_idIndexMarker1760"></a>, conventional phenomena again appear to his mind as inherently existent, and his uncontaminated wisdom temporarily becomes non-manifest. Only a Buddha can manifest uncontaminated wisdom<a id="_idIndexMarker1761"></a> at the same time as directly perceiving conventional truths. An uncommon quality of a Buddha<a id="_idIndexMarker1762"></a> is that a single moment of a Buddha’s mind realizes both conventional truth and ultimate truth directly and simultaneously. There are many levels of ultimate bodhichitta<a id="_idIndexMarker1763"></a>. For instance, the ultimate bodhichitta attained through Tantric practice is more profound than that developed through Sutra practice alone, and the supreme ultimate bodhichitta is that of a Buddha.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">If through valid reasoning we realize the emptiness that is empty of the first <a id="_idIndexMarker1764"></a>extreme, the extreme of production, we will easily be able to realize the emptiness that is empty of the remaining seven extremes. Once we have realized the emptiness that is empty of the eight extremes we have realized the emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1765"></a> of all phenomena. Having gained this realization, we continue to contemplate and meditate on the emptiness of produced phenomena and so forth, and as our meditations deepen we will feel all phenomena dissolving into emptiness. We will then be able to maintain a single-pointed concentration on the emptiness of all phenomena.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">To meditate on the emptiness of produced phenomena<a id="_idIndexMarker1766"></a> we can think:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---meditation---single"><a id="_idIndexMarker1767"></a>My self, who was born through causes and conditions as a human being, is unfindable when I search for it with wisdom within my body and my mind, or separate from my body and mind. This proves that my self that I normally see does not exist at all.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">Having contemplated in this way we feel our self that we normally see disappears and we perceive a space-like emptiness that is the mere absence<a id="_idIndexMarker1768"></a> of our self that we normally see. We feel that our mind enters into this space-like emptiness and remains there single-pointedly. This meditation is called ‘space-like meditative equipoise on <a id="_idIndexMarker1769"></a>emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1770"></a>’.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para"><a id="_idIndexMarker1771"></a>Just as eagle<a id="_idIndexMarker1772"></a>s soar through the vast expanse of the sky without meeting any obstructions, needing only minimal effort to maintain their flight, so advanced meditators concentrating on emptiness can meditate on emptiness for a long time with little effort. Their minds soar through space-like emptiness, undistracted by any other phenomenon. When we meditate on emptiness we should try to emulate these meditators. Once we have found our object of meditation, the mere absence of our self that we normally see, we should refrain from further analysis and simply rest our mind in the experience of this emptiness. From time to time we should check to make sure that we have lost neither the clear appearance of emptiness nor the recognition of its meaning, but we should not check too forcefully as this will disturb our concentration. Our meditation should not be like the flight of a small bird, which never stops flapping its wings and is always changing direction, but like the flight of an eagle, which soars gently with only occasional adjustments to its wings. Through meditating in this way we will feel our mind dissolving into and becoming one with emptiness.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">If we are successful in doing this, then during our meditation we are free from manifest self-grasping. If, on the other hand, we spend all our time checking and analyzing, never allowing our mind to relax into the space of emptiness, we will never gain this experience and our meditation will not serve to reduce our self-grasping.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">In general we need to improve our understanding of emptiness through extensive study<a id="_idIndexMarker1773"></a>, approaching it from many angles and using many different lines of reasoning. It is also important to become thoroughly familiar with one complete meditation on emptiness through continuous contemplation, understanding exactly how to use the reasoning to lead to an experience of emptiness. We can then concentrate on emptiness single-pointedly and try to mix our mind with it, like water mixing with water.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1"><a id="_idIndexMarker1774"></a>THE UNION OF THE TWO TRUTHS</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">Strictly speaking, when we say the union of conventional truth and ultimate truth, in this context conventional truth refers only to subtle <a id="_idIndexMarker1775"></a>conventional truth, which is things existing as <a id="_idIndexMarker1776"></a>mere appearances. This subtle conventional truth and ultimate truth are in union, which means that they are non-dual, or one object. Thus, subtle conventional truth is not actual conventional truth but <a id="_idIndexMarker1777"></a>ultimate truth, a non-deceptive object. From the point of view of truth, conventional truths do not exist; they are false objects created by the ignorant mind of self-grasping. However, conventional truths exist for ordinary beings, who do not understand emptiness, but they do not exist for <a id="_idIndexMarker1778"></a>Superior beings, who realize emptiness directly. The instruction of the union of the two truths, the union of <a id="_idIndexMarker1779"></a>appearance and emptiness, is <a id="_idIndexMarker1780"></a>Buddha’s ultimate view and intention. When we receive the fourth empowerment of <a id="_idIndexMarker1781"></a>Highest Yoga Tantra we receive the oral instructions of this union. When, through training continually in this union, we realize directly the union of the two truths, the union of appearance and emptiness, we become an enlightened <a id="_idIndexMarker1782"></a>Buddha who is completely free from subtle mistaken appearance, and who has the ability to benefit each and every living being every day through our countless <a id="_idIndexMarker1783"></a>emanations. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When something such as our body appears to us, both the body and the inherently existent <a id="_idIndexMarker1784"></a>body<a id="_idIndexMarker1785"></a> appear simultaneously. This is dualistic appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1786"></a>, which is subtle mistaken <a id="_idIndexMarker1787"></a>appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1788"></a>. Only Buddhas are free from such mistaken appearances. The main purpose of understanding and meditating on the union of the two truths is to prevent dualistic <a id="_idIndexMarker1789"></a>appearances – appearances of inherent existence to the mind that is meditating on emptiness – and thereby enable our mind to dissolve into emptiness. Once we can do this, our meditation on emptiness will be very powerful in eliminating our delusions. If we correctly identify and negate the <a id="_idIndexMarker1790"></a>inherently existent body, the body that we normally see, and meditate on the mere absence<a id="_idIndexMarker1791"></a> of such a body with strong concentration, we will feel our normal <a id="_idIndexMarker1792"></a>body dissolving into emptiness. We will understand that the real nature of our body is emptiness and that our body<a id="_idIndexMarker1793"></a> is merely a manifestation of emptiness.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Emptiness is like the <a id="_idIndexMarker1794"></a>sky and our body is like the blue of the sky. Just as the blue is a manifestation of the sky itself and cannot be separated from it, so our blue-like body is simply a manifestation of the sky of its emptiness and cannot be separated from it. If we realize this, when we focus on the emptiness of our body we feel that our body itself dissolves into its ultimate nature<a id="_idIndexMarker1795"></a>. In this way, we can easily overcome the conventional appearance of the body in our meditations, and our mind naturally mixes with emptiness.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">In the <span class="_1---Italic">Heart Sutra</span><a id="_idIndexMarker1796"></a>, Bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara<a id="_idIndexMarker1797"></a> says, ‘Form is not other than emptiness.’ This means that conventional phenomena, such as our body, do not exist separately from their emptiness. When we meditate on the emptiness of our body with this understanding, we know that the emptiness appearing to our mind is the very nature of our body, and that apart from this emptiness there is no body. Meditating in this way will greatly weaken our self-grasping<a id="_idIndexMarker1798"></a> mind. If we really believed that our body and its emptiness were the same nature, our self-grasping would definitely become weaker.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Although we can divide emptinesses from the point of view of their bases, and speak of the emptiness of the body, the emptiness of the I and so forth, in truth all emptinesses are the <a id="_idIndexMarker1799"></a>same nature. If we look at ten bottles, we can distinguish ten different spaces inside the bottles, but in reality these spaces are the same nature; and if we break the bottles, the spaces become indistinguishable. In the same way, although we can speak of the emptiness of the body, the mind, the I and so forth, in reality they are the same nature and indistinguishable. The only way in which they can be distinguished is by their conventional bases<a id="_idIndexMarker1800"></a>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">There are two principal benefits of understanding that all emptinesses are the <a id="_idIndexMarker1801"></a>same nature: in the meditation session our mind will mix with emptiness more easily, and in the meditation break we will be able to see all appearances as equal manifestation<a id="_idIndexMarker1802"></a>s of their emptiness.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">For as long as we feel that there is a gap between our mind and emptiness – that our mind is ‘here’ and emptiness is ‘there’ – our mind will not mix with emptiness. Knowing that all emptinesses are the same nature helps to close this gap. In ordinary life we experience many different objects – good, bad, attractive, unattractive – and our feelings towards them differ. Because we feel that the differences exist from the side of the objects<a id="_idIndexMarker1803"></a>, our mind is unbalanced and we develop <a id="_idIndexMarker1804"></a>attachment to attractive objects, aversion to unattractive objects and indifference to neutral objects. It is very difficult to mix such an uneven mind with emptiness. To mix our mind with emptiness we need to know that, although phenomena appear in many different aspects, in essence they are all empty. The differences we see are just appearances to mistaken minds; from the point of view of ultimate truth all phenomena are equal in emptiness. For a qualified meditator single-pointedly absorbed in emptiness, there is no difference between production<a id="_idIndexMarker1805"></a> and disintegration, impermanence and permanence, going and coming, singularity and plurality – everything is equal in emptiness and all problems of <a id="_idIndexMarker1806"></a>attachment, <a id="_idIndexMarker1807"></a>anger and self-grasping ignorance are solved. In this experience, everything becomes very peaceful and comfortable, balanced and harmonious, joyful and wonderful. There is no heat, no cold, no lower, no higher, no here, no there, no self, no other, no samsara<a id="_idIndexMarker1808"></a> – everything is equal in the peace of emptiness. This realization is called the ‘yoga of equalizing samsara and nirvana<a id="_idIndexMarker1809"></a>’, and is explained in detail in both the Sutras and Tantras.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Since all <a id="_idIndexMarker1810"></a>emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1811"></a>es are the same nature, the ultimate nature of a <a id="_idIndexMarker1812"></a>mind that is meditating on emptiness is the same nature as the ultimate nature of its object. When we first meditate on emptiness our mind and emptiness appear to be two separate phenomena, but when we understand that all emptinesses are the same nature we will know that this feeling of separation is simply the experience of a mistaken mind. In reality our mind and emptiness are ultimately of one taste. If we apply this knowledge in our meditations, it will help to prevent the appearance of the conventional nature<a id="_idIndexMarker1813"></a> of our mind and allow our mind to dissolve into emptiness.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Having mixed our mind with emptiness, when we arise from meditation we will experience all phenomena equally as manifestations of their emptiness. Instead of feeling that the attractive, unattractive and neutral objects we see are inherently different, we will know that in essence they are the same nature. Just as both the gentlest and most violent waves in an ocean are equally water, likewise both attractive forms and repulsive forms are equally manifestations of emptiness. Realizing this, our mind will become balanced and peaceful. We will recognize all conventional appearances as the magical play of the mind, and we will not grasp strongly at their apparent differences.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When Milarepa<a id="_idIndexMarker1814"></a> once taught emptiness to a woman, he compared emptiness to the sky and conventional truths to clouds and told her to meditate on the sky<a id="_idIndexMarker1815"></a>. She followed his instructions with great success, but she had one problem – when she meditated on the sky of emptiness everything disappeared, and she could not understand how phenomena could exist conventionally. She said to Milarepa, ‘I find it easy to meditate on the sky but difficult to establish the clouds. Please teach me how to meditate on the clouds.’ Milarepa replied, ‘If your meditation on the sky is going well, the clouds will not be a problem. Clouds simply appear in the sky – they arise from the sky and dissolve back into the sky. As your experience of the sky improves, you will naturally come to understand the clouds.’</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">In Tibetan, the word for both sky and space is ‘namkha’, although space is different from sky. There are two types of space, produced space<a id="_idIndexMarker1816"></a> and unproduced space<a id="_idIndexMarker1817"></a>. Produced space is the visible space we can see inside a room or in the sky. This space may become dark at night and light during the day, and as it undergoes change in this way it is an impermanent phenomenon<a id="_idIndexMarker1818"></a>. The characteristic property of produced space is that it does not obstruct objects – if there is space in a room we can place objects there without obstruction. Similarly, birds are able to fly through the space of the sky because it lacks obstruction, whereas they cannot fly through a mountain! Therefore it is clear that produced space lacks, or is empty of, obstructive contact. This mere lack, or empty, of obstructive contact is unproduced space.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Because unproduced space is the mere absence<a id="_idIndexMarker1819"></a> of <a id="_idIndexMarker1820"></a>obstructive contact it does not undergo momentary change and is therefore a permanent phenomenon<a id="_idIndexMarker1821"></a>. Whereas produced space is visible and quite easy to understand, unproduced space is a mere absence of obstructive contact and is rather more subtle. However, once we understand unproduced space we will find it easier to understand emptiness.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">The only difference between emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1822"></a> and unproduced space is their <a id="_idIndexMarker1823"></a>object of negation. The object of negation of unproduced space is obstructive contact whereas the object of negation of emptiness is inherent existence<a id="_idIndexMarker1824"></a>. Because unproduced space is the best analogy for understanding emptiness, it is used in the Sutras and in many scriptures. Unproduced space is a non-affirming negative phenomenon<a id="_idIndexMarker1825"></a> – a phenomenon that is realized by a mind that merely eliminates its negated object without realizing another positive phenomenon. Produced space is an affirmative, or positive, phenomenon<a id="_idIndexMarker1826"></a> – a phenomenon that is realized without the mind explicitly eliminating a negated object. More details on these two types of phenomenon can be found in the books <span class="_1---Italic">The New Heart of Wisdom</span><a id="_idIndexMarker1827"></a> and <span class="_1---Italic">Ocean of Nectar</span><a id="_idIndexMarker1828"></a>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1"><a id="_idIndexMarker1829"></a>THE PRACTICE OF EMPTINESS IN OUR DAILY ACTIVITIES </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para---space-below">In the Sutras <a id="_idIndexMarker1830"></a>Buddha said all phenomena are like illusions. In this context, all phenomena means all <a id="_idIndexMarker1831"></a>phenomena that we normally see or perceive. Thus the real meaning of the Sutra is that we should know that all phenomena that we normally see or perceive are like illusions. Although a magician’s illusions appear clearly they do not actually exist. In the same way, although <a id="_idIndexMarker1832"></a>phenomena that we normally see or perceive appear clearly they do not actually exist. Although things appear to us as inherently existent<a id="_idIndexMarker1833"></a> we should remember that these appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1834"></a>s are deceptive and that in reality the <a id="_idIndexMarker1835"></a>things that we normally see do not exist. As mentioned earlier, in <span class="_1---Italic">King of Concentration Sutra</span><a id="_idIndexMarker1836"></a> Buddha<a id="_idIndexMarker1837"></a> says:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">A magician<a id="_idIndexMarker1838"></a> creates various things</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Such as horses, elephants and so forth.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">His creations do not actually exist;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">You should know all things in the same way.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">The last two lines of this verse mean that just as we know that the horses and elephants created by the magician do not exist, in the same way we should know that all the things that we normally see do not actually exist. This chapter <span class="_1---Italic">Ultimate Bodhichitta </span>has extensively explained how all the things that we normally see do not exist.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When a magician creates an illusory horse, a horse appears very clearly to his mind but he knows that it is just an illusion. Indeed, the very appearance of the horse reminds him that there is no horse in front of him. In the same way, when we are very familiar with emptiness, the very fact that things appear to be inherently existent<a id="_idIndexMarker1839"></a> will remind us that they are not inherently existent. We should therefore recognize that whatever appears to us in our daily life is like an illusion and lacks inherent existence. In this way our wisdom<a id="_idIndexMarker1840"></a> will increase day by day, and our self-grasping ignorance and other delusions<a id="_idIndexMarker1841"></a> will naturally diminish.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Between meditation sessions we should be like an actor<a id="_idIndexMarker1842"></a>. When an actor plays the part of a king, he dresses, speaks and acts like a king, but he knows all the time that he is not a real king. In the same way we should live and function in the conventional world<a id="_idIndexMarker1843"></a> yet always remember that we ourself, our environment and the people around us <a id="_idIndexMarker1844"></a>that we normally see do not exist at all. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">If we think like this we will be able to live in the conventional world<a id="_idIndexMarker1845"></a> without grasping at it. We will treat it lightly, and have the flexibility of mind to respond to every situation in a constructive way. Knowing that whatever appears to our mind is mere appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1846"></a>, when attractive objects appear we will not grasp at them and develop attachment<a id="_idIndexMarker1847"></a>, and when unattractive objects appear we will not grasp at them and develop aversion or anger.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">In <span class="_1---Italic">Training the Mind in Seven Points</span><a id="_idIndexMarker1848"></a>, Geshe Chekhawa<a id="_idIndexMarker1849"></a> says, ‘Think that all phenomena<a id="_idIndexMarker1850"></a> are like dreams.’ Some of the things we see in our dreams are beautiful and some are ugly, but they are all <a id="_idIndexMarker1851"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1852"></a>mere appearances to our dreaming mind. They do not exist from their own side<a id="_idIndexMarker1853"></a>, and are empty of inherent existence. It is the same with the objects we perceive when we are awake<a id="_idIndexMarker1854"></a> – they too are mere appearances to mind and lack inherent existence.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">All phenomena lack <a id="_idIndexMarker1855"></a>inherent existence. When we look at a rainbow<a id="_idIndexMarker1856"></a> it appears to occupy a particular location in space, and it seems that if we searched we would be able to find where the rainbow touches the ground. However, we know that no matter how hard we search we will never be able to find the end of the rainbow, for as soon as we arrive at the place where we saw the rainbow touch the ground, the rainbow will have disappeared. If we do not search for it, the rainbow appears clearly; but when we look for it, it is not there. All phenomena are like this. If we do not analyze them they appear clearly, but when we search for them analytically, trying to isolate them from everything else, they are not there.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">If something did exist inherently, and we investigated it by separating it from all other phenomena, we would be able to find<a id="_idIndexMarker1857"></a> it. However, all phenomena<a id="_idIndexMarker1858"></a> are like rainbows – if we search for them we will never find them. At first we might find this view very uncomfortable and difficult to accept, but this is quite natural. With greater familiarity we will find this reasoning more acceptable, and eventually we will realize that it is true.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">It is important to understand that emptiness does not mean nothingness<a id="_idIndexMarker1859"></a>. Although things do not exist from their own side<a id="_idIndexMarker1860"></a>, independent of the mind, they do exist in the sense that they are understood by a valid mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1861"></a>. The world<a id="_idIndexMarker1862"></a> we experience when we are awake is similar to the world<a id="_idIndexMarker1863"></a> we experience when we are dream<a id="_idIndexMarker1864"></a>ing. We cannot say that dream things do not exist, but if we believe that they exist as more than mere appearances to the mind, existing ‘out there’, then we are mistaken, as we will discover when we wake up.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">As mentioned before, there is no greater method for experiencing peace of mind<a id="_idIndexMarker1865"></a> and happiness than to understand and meditate on emptiness. Since it is our self-grasping that keeps us bound to the prison of samsara and is the source of all our suffering, meditation on emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1866"></a> is the universal solution to all our problems<a id="_idIndexMarker1867"></a>. It is the medicine that cures all mental and physical diseases, and the nectar that bestows the everlasting happiness of nirvana<a id="_idIndexMarker1868"></a> and enlightenment.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1"><a id="_idIndexMarker1869"></a>A SIMPLE TRAINING IN ULTIMATE BODHICHITTA</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para---space-below">We begin by thinking:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---meditation---single">I must attain enlightenment to benefit each and every living being every day. For this purpose I will attain a direct realization of the way things really are.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">With this bodhichitta motivation, we contemplate:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---meditation---single">Normally I see my body within its parts – the hands, back and so forth – but neither the individual parts nor the collection of the parts are my body because they are the parts of my body and not the body itself. However, there is no ‘my body’ other than its parts.  Through searching with wisdom for my body in this way, I realize that my <a id="_idIndexMarker1870"></a>body is unfindable. This is a valid reason to prove that my body that I normally see does not exist at all.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">Through contemplating this point we try to perceive the mere absence of the body that we normally see. This mere absence<a id="_idIndexMarker1871"></a> of the body that we normally see is the emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1872"></a> of our body, and we meditate on this emptiness single-pointedly for as long as possible. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">We should continually practise this contemplation and meditation, and then move to the next stage, meditation on the emptiness of our self. We should contemplate and think:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---meditation---single">Normally I see my self within my body and mind, but neither my body, nor my mind, nor the collection of my body and mind is my self, because these are my possessions and my self is the possessor; and possessor and possessions cannot be the same. However, there is no ‘my self’ other than my body and mind. Through searching with wisdom for my self in this way, I realize that my self is unfindable. This is a valid reason to prove that my self that I normally see does not exist at all. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">Through contemplating this point we try to perceive the mere absence<a id="_idIndexMarker1873"></a> of our self that we normally see. This mere absence of our self that we normally see is the emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1874"></a> of our self, and we meditate on this emptiness single-pointedly for as long as possible. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">We should continually practise this contemplation and meditation, and then move to the next stage, meditation on the emptiness of all phenomena. We should contemplate and think:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---meditation---single">As with my body and my self, all other phenomena are unfindable when I search for them with wisdom. This is a valid reason to prove that all phenomena that I normally see or perceive do not exist at all.  </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">Through contemplating this point we try to perceive the mere absence of all phenomena that we normally see or perceive. This mere absence<a id="_idIndexMarker1875"></a> of all phenomena that we normally see or perceive is the emptiness of all phenomena. We meditate continually on this emptiness of all phenomena with bodhichitta motivation until we are able to maintain our concentration clearly for one minute every time we meditate on it. Our concentration that has this ability is called ‘concentration<a id="_idIndexMarker1876"></a> of placing the mind’. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">In the second stage, with the concentration of placing the mind, we meditate continually on the emptiness of all phenomena until we are able to maintain our concentration clearly for five minutes every time we meditate on it. Our concentration that has this ability is called ‘concentration<a id="_idIndexMarker1877"></a> of continual placement’. In the third stage, with the concentration of continual placement we meditate continually on the emptiness of all phenomena until we are able to immediately remember our object of meditation – the mere absence of all phenomena that we normally see or perceive – whenever we lose it during meditation. Our concentration that has this ability is called ‘concentration<a id="_idIndexMarker1878"></a> of replacement’. In the fourth stage, with the concentration of replacement we meditate continually on the emptiness of all phenomena until we are able to maintain our concentration clearly during the entire meditation session without forgetting the object of meditation. Our concentration that has this ability is called ‘concentration<a id="_idIndexMarker1879"></a> of close placement’. At this stage we have very stable and clear concentration focused on the emptiness of all phenomena.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Then, with the concentration of close placement, we meditate continually on the emptiness of all phenomena until finally we attain the concentration of tranquil abiding<a id="_idIndexMarker1880"></a> focused on emptiness, which causes us to experience special physical and mental suppleness and bliss. With this concentration of tranquil abiding we will develop a special wisdom that realizes the emptiness of all phenomena very clearly. This wisdom is called ‘superior seeing<a id="_idIndexMarker1881"></a>’. Through continually meditating on the concentration of tranquil abiding associated with superior seeing, our wisdom of superior seeing will transform into the wisdom that directly realizes the emptiness of all phenomena. This direct realization of emptiness<a id="_idIndexMarker1882"></a> is the actual ultimate bodhichitta. The moment we attain the wisdom of ultimate bodhichitta we become a Superior Bodhisattva<a id="_idIndexMarker1883"></a>. As mentioned before, conventional <a id="_idIndexMarker1884"></a>bodhichitta is the nature of compassion, and <a id="_idIndexMarker1885"></a>ultimate bodhichitta is the nature of wisdom. These two bodhichittas are like the <a id="_idIndexMarker1886"></a>two wings of a bird with which we can fly and very quickly reach the enlightened world.  </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">In <span class="_1---Italic">Advice from Atisha’s Heart</span><span class="_1---Italic"><a id="_idIndexMarker1887"></a></span> <a id="_idIndexMarker1888"></a>Atisha says:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---prose---single">Friends, until you attain enlightenment, the Spiritual Teacher<a id="_idIndexMarker1889"></a> is indispensable; therefore rely upon the holy Spiritual Guide.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">We need to rely upon our <a id="_idIndexMarker1890"></a>Spiritual Guide until we attain enlightenment. The reason for this is very simple. The ultimate goal of human life<a id="_idIndexMarker1891"></a> is to attain enlightenment<a id="_idIndexMarker1892"></a>, and this depends upon continually receiving the special blessings<a id="_idIndexMarker1893"></a> of Buddha through our Spiritual Guide. Buddha attained enlightenment<a id="_idIndexMarker1894"></a> with the sole intention of leading all living beings along the stages of the path to enlightenment through his emanations<a id="_idIndexMarker1895"></a>. Who is his emanation who is leading us along the stages of the path to enlightenment? It is clearly our present Spiritual Teacher who is sincerely and correctly leading us along the paths of renunciation<a id="_idIndexMarker1896"></a>, bodhichitta and the correct view of emptiness by giving these teachings and showing a practical example of someone who is sincerely practising them. With this understanding we should strongly believe that our Spiritual Guide<a id="_idIndexMarker1897"></a> is an emanation of Buddha, and develop and maintain deep faith<a id="_idIndexMarker1898"></a> in him or her.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below"><a id="_idIndexMarker1899"></a>Atisha also says:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---prose---single">Until you realize ultimate truth, listening<a id="_idIndexMarker1900"></a> is indispensable; therefore listen to the instructions of the Spiritual Guide.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">Even if we were mistakenly to <a id="_idIndexMarker1901"></a>see <a id="_idIndexMarker1902"></a>two moons in the sky, this mistaken <a id="_idIndexMarker1903"></a>appearance<a id="_idIndexMarker1904"></a> would remind us that in fact there are not two moons, but only one. In a similar way, when the <a id="_idIndexMarker1905"></a>things that we normally see appear to us, just their <a id="_idIndexMarker1906"></a>appearance reminds us that they do not exist. Through understanding this we will stop grasping at them. If we are able to do this, it is a clear indication that our understanding of emptiness is qualified. Until our understanding of emptiness is qualified, and to prevent <a id="_idIndexMarker1907"></a>self-grasping from developing, we should listen to, read and practise the instructions of our Spiritual Guide. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">If we sincerely practise with strong <a id="_idIndexMarker1908"></a>mindfulness and <a id="_idIndexMarker1909"></a>alertness the above instructions of how to stop grasping at the things that we normally see, our self-grasping will definitely reduce. As a result of this our daily problems will definitely reduce and finally our <a id="_idIndexMarker1910"></a>self-grasping will cease permanently. All our problems and suffering of this life and of our countless future lives will then permanently cease. While we have this <a id="_idIndexMarker1911"></a>precious human life we have the opportunity to accomplish this aim. We should never allow ourself to waste this precious opportunity.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para _idGenParaOverride-1">All the contemplations and meditations presented in this book should be practised in conjunction with the preliminary practices for meditation presented in Appendix I: <span class="_1---Italic">Liberating Prayer &amp; Prayers for Meditation</span>. These preliminary practices will enable us to purify our mind, accumulate merit and receive the blessings of the enlightened beings, thus ensuring that our meditation practice is successful. A more detailed explanation of relying upon our Spiritual Guide can be found in the book <span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span><a id="_idIndexMarker1912"></a>.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
