<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		<title>How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-23</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
		<link href="css/eBook_CSS_November2016.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-23" lang="en-GB" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<div>
			<p id="_idParaDest-23" class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_00-Chapter-title---TOC-Level-1"><a id="_idTextAnchor021"></a>The Supreme Good Heart</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">The supreme <a id="_idIndexMarker1388"></a>good heart in this context is <a id="_idIndexMarker1389"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1390"></a>bodhichitta. ‘Bodhi’ means ‘enlightenment’, and ‘chitta’ ‘mind’; therefore ‘bodhichitta’ literally means ‘mind of enlightenment’. It is defined as a mind, motivated by <a id="_idIndexMarker1391"></a>compassion for all living beings, which spontaneously seeks enlightenment to benefit each and every living being. Bodhichitta is born from compassion, which itself depends upon cherishing love. <a id="_idIndexMarker1392"></a>Cherishing love can be likened to a field, compassion to the seeds, <a id="_idIndexMarker1393"></a>taking and giving to the supreme methods for making the seeds grow, and bodhichitta to the harvest. The cherishing love that is developed through the practice of exchanging self with others is more profound than that developed through other methods, and so the resultant compassion and <a id="_idIndexMarker1394"></a>bodhichitta are also more profound. If we have compassion for all living beings generated through exchanging self with others, bodhichitta will arise naturally. The strength of our bodhichitta depends entirely upon the strength of our compassion.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Of all Dharma realizations, bodhichitta is supreme. This profoundly compassionate mind is the very essence of the Bodhisattva’s training. Developing and maintaining the <a id="_idIndexMarker1395"></a>good heart of bodhichitta enables us to transform all our virtues into the <a id="_idIndexMarker1396"></a>path to enlightenment, solve all our problems, fulfil all our wishes, and develop the power to help others in the most appropriate and beneficial ways. <a id="_idIndexMarker1397"></a>Bodhichitta is the best friend we can have and the highest <a id="_idIndexMarker1398"></a>quality we can develop. The moment we develop bodhichitta we will become a <a id="_idIndexMarker1399"></a>Bodhisattva, a Son or Daughter of <a id="_idIndexMarker1400"></a>Conqueror Buddha. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para"><a id="_idIndexMarker1401"></a>Atisha had many Teachers, but the one he revered above all was Guru <a id="_idIndexMarker1402"></a>Serlingpa. Whenever he heard Serlingpa’s name, he would prostrate. When Atisha’s disciples asked him why he respected Serlingpa more than his other Teachers, he replied, ‘It is due to the kindness of Guru Serlingpa that I now have the good heart of bodhichitta.’ Through the power of his bodhichitta, Atisha was able to bring great joy and happiness to everyone he met, and whatever he did was of benefit to others.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">How does bodhichitta solve all our problems and fulfil all our wishes? As already explained, problems do not exist outside the mind; they are our unpleasant feelings that necessarily come from our self-cherishing. If we had the compassionate mind of bodhichitta our <a id="_idIndexMarker1403"></a>self-cherishing would have no power to cause us to experience problems. With this supreme good heart we will be happy all the time. Furthermore, with the supremely altruistic mind of bodhichitta we will create a vast amount of merit, or good fortune, because we engage in all our actions for the benefit of others. With such an accumulation of <a id="_idIndexMarker1404"></a>merit, our wishes will easily be fulfilled, we will develop a tremendous capacity to benefit others, and all our <a id="_idIndexMarker1405"></a>Dharma activities will be successful.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We need to contemplate the benefits of bodhichitta until we are deeply inspired to develop this rare and precious mind. An extensive presentation of these benefits can be found in the books <a id="_idIndexMarker1406"></a><span class="_1---Italic">Meaningful to Behold</span> and <span class="_1---Italic"><a id="_idIndexMarker1407"></a></span><span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below">At the moment we have a very special opportunity to develop bodhichitta. However, we do not know how long our good fortune will last, and if we waste this opportunity it will not arise again. If we wasted an opportunity to make a lot of money, or to obtain a good job or an attractive partner, we would probably feel strong regret, but in reality we have not lost a great deal. These things are not so difficult to find, and even when found they do not bring us real happiness. Not taking advantage of this unique opportunity to develop such a good heart, however, is an irretrievable loss. Humans have the greatest opportunity for spiritual development, and of all the possible types of rebirth we could have taken we have been born human. Nowadays most humans have no interest in spiritual development and, of those who do, only a few have met Buddhadharma. If we contemplate this carefully we will realize how very fortunate we are to have this <a id="_idIndexMarker1408"></a>precious opportunity to attain the supreme happiness of Buddhahood.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1">DEVELOPING <a id="_idIndexMarker1409"></a>BODHICHITTA</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">We should understand that, despite our strong wish to protect all living beings, we do not have the power to do so at present. Just as one drowning person cannot save another, no matter how fervently he or she may wish to do so, likewise it is only when we have freed ourself from suffering and mental limitations that we are able to free others. If we ask ourself who has the actual power to protect all living beings, we will realize that it is only a Buddha. Only a <a id="_idIndexMarker1410"></a>Buddha is free from all faults and limitations, and has both the omniscient wisdom and the skill to help each and every living being in accordance with his or her individual needs and dispositions. Only a Buddha has reached the shore of enlightenment and is in a position to release all mother beings from the cruel ocean of suffering. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">When we attain a Buddha’s enlightenment we will be able to benefit each and every living being every day through bestowing blessings and through our countless <a id="_idIndexMarker1411"></a>emanations. If we consider this deeply, bodhichitta will arise naturally in our mind. We contemplate:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---meditation---single">I want to protect all living beings from suffering, but in my present, limited state I have no power to do this. Because only a <a id="_idIndexMarker1412"></a>Buddha has such power, I must become a Buddha, an enlightened being, as quickly as possible.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">We meditate on this determination, which is bodhichitta, single-pointedly again and again until we develop the spontaneous wish to attain enlightenment to benefit each and every living being every day. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">We need to have this precious mind of bodhichitta in our heart. It is our inner <a id="_idIndexMarker1413"></a>Spiritual Guide, who leads us directly to the state of supreme happiness of <a id="_idIndexMarker1414"></a>enlightenment; and it is the real <a id="_idIndexMarker1415"></a>wishfulfilling jewel through which we can fulfil our own and others’ wishes. There is no greater beneficial intention than this. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When we want a cup of tea, our main wish is to drink tea, but to fulfil this wish we naturally develop the secondary wish to find a cup. In a similar way, the main wish of those who have great compassion is to protect all living beings from their suffering; but to fulfil this wish they know that they must first attain Buddhahood themselves, and so they naturally develop the secondary wish to attain enlightenment. Just as finding a cup is the means to accomplish our goal of drinking tea, so attaining enlightenment is the means to accomplish our ultimate goal of benefiting all living beings.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">At first our <a id="_idIndexMarker1416"></a>bodhichitta will be artificial, or fabricated, bodhichitta, arising only when we make a specific effort to generate it. The best way to transform this into spontaneous bodhichitta is to gain deep <a id="_idIndexMarker1417"></a>familiarity with it through continual practice. As most of our time is spent out of meditation, it is vital that we make use of every opportunity to improve our training in bodhichitta during our <a id="_idIndexMarker1418"></a>daily life. We need to make our <a id="_idIndexMarker1419"></a>meditation sessions and <a id="_idIndexMarker1420"></a>meditation breaks mutually supportive. During our meditation session, we may experience a peaceful state of mind and develop many virtuous intentions; but if we forget them all as soon as we arise from meditation we will not be able to solve our daily problems of anger, attachment and ignorance, nor make progress in our spiritual practice. We must learn to integrate our spiritual practice into our daily activities so that day and night we can maintain the peaceful states of mind, pure intentions and pure view that we developed in meditation.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">At the moment we may find that our meditations and our daily life are pulling in different directions. In meditation we try to generate virtuous minds but, because we cannot stop thinking about our other activities, our <a id="_idIndexMarker1421"></a>concentration is very poor. The virtuous feelings we do manage to develop are then quickly dissipated in the busyness of daily life, and we return to our meditation seat tired, tense and filled with distracting thoughts. We can overcome this problem by transforming all our daily activities and experiences into the <a id="_idIndexMarker1422"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1423"></a>spiritual path through developing special ways of thinking. Activities such as cooking, working, talking and relaxing are not intrinsically mundane; they are mundane only if done with a mundane mind. By doing exactly the same actions with a spiritual motivation, they become pure spiritual practices. For example, when we talk to our friends our <a id="_idIndexMarker1424"></a>motivation is usually mixed with self-cherishing and we say whatever comes into our mind, regardless of whether or not it is beneficial. We can, however, talk to others with the sole purpose of benefiting them, encouraging them to develop positive states of mind and taking care not to say anything that will upset them. Instead of thinking about how we can impress people, we should think about how we can help them, recalling how they are trapped in samsara and lack pure happiness. In this way, talking with our friends can become a means of improving our love, compassion and other realizations. If we can skilfully transform all our daily activities in this way, instead of feeling drained and tired when we sit down to meditate we will feel joyful and inspired, and it will be easy to develop pure concentration.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para _idGenParaOverride-1">Developing <a id="_idIndexMarker1425"></a>great compassion, compassion for all living beings, is the main, or substantial, cause of generating <a id="_idIndexMarker1426"></a>bodhichitta – it is like the seed of <a id="_idIndexMarker1427"></a>bodhichitta. To enable this seed to grow, we also need the cooperative conditions of accumulating merit, purifying negativity and receiving the blessings of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. If we gather all these causes and conditions together, it is not difficult to develop bodhichitta. To fulfil the wishes of our compassionate mind of bodhichitta, we need to engage sincerely in the practices of giving, moral discipline, patience, effort, concentration and wisdom. When these practices are motivated by bodhichitta, they are called ‘the <a id="_idIndexMarker1428"></a>six perfections’. We especially need to apply great effort to training in the wisdom that realizes <a id="_idIndexMarker1429"></a>ultimate truth, emptiness. We should know that a direct realization of <a id="_idIndexMarker1430"></a>emptiness motivated by bodhichitta is <a id="_idIndexMarker1431"></a>ultimate bodhichitta, which is the nature of wisdom. The bodhichitta that has already been explained above is conventional <a id="_idIndexMarker1432"></a>bodhichitta, which is the nature of compassion. These two bodhichittas are like the two <a id="_idIndexMarker1433"></a>wings of a bird with which we can fly direct to the enlightened <a id="_idIndexMarker1434"></a>Pure Land.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
