<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		<title>How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-32</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
		<link href="css/eBook_CSS_November2016.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-32" lang="en-GB" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<div>
			<p id="_idParaDest-29" class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_00-Chapter-title---TOC-Level-1"><a id="_idTextAnchor027"></a>Glossary</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Aggregate</span><span class="_1---Bold-Italic"> </span>In general, all functioning things are aggregates because they are an aggregation of their parts. In particular, a person of the desire realm or form realm has five aggregates: the aggregates of form, feeling, discrimination, compositional factors and consciousness. A being of the formless realm lacks the aggregate of form but has the other four. A person’s form aggregate is his or her body. The remaining four aggregates are aspects of his mind. See <span class="_1---Italic">The New Heart of Wisdom</span>. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Alertness</span> A mental factor which is a type of wisdom that examines our activity of body, speech and mind, and knows whether or not faults are developing. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Aryadeva</span> A third century AD Indian Buddhist scholar and meditation master, who was a disciple of Nagarjuna. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Asanga</span> A great Indian Buddhist Yogi and scholar of the fifth century, author of <span class="_1---Italic">Compendium of Abhidharma</span>. See <span class="_1---Italic">Living Meaningfully, Dying Joyfully</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">The New Heart of Wisdom</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Atisha</span> (AD 982-1054) A famous Indian Buddhist scholar and meditation master. He was Abbot of the great Buddhist monastery of Vikramashila at a time when Mahayana Buddhism was flourishing in India. He was later invited to Tibet where he re-introduced pure Buddhism. He is the author of the first text on the stages of the path, <span class="_1---Italic">Lamp for the Path</span>. His tradition later became known as the ‘Kadampa Tradition’. See <span class="_1---Italic">Modern Buddhism</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span>. See also <span class="_1---Italic">Kadampa</span>, <span class="_1---Italic">Kadampa Buddhism</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Kadampa Tradition</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Attachment</span> A deluded mental factor that observes a contaminated object, regards it as a cause of happiness and wishes for it. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Attention</span> A mental factor that functions to focus the mind on a particular attribute of an object. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Basis of imputation</span> All phenomena are imputed upon their parts, therefore any of the individual parts, or the entire collection of the parts, of any phenomenon is its basis of imputation. A phenomenon is imputed by mind in dependence upon its basis of imputation appearing to that mind. See <span class="_1---Italic">The New Heart of Wisdom</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Beginningless time</span> According to the Buddhist world view, there is no beginning to mind, and so no beginning to time. Therefore, all living beings have taken countless previous rebirths.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Blessing</span> The transformation of our mind from a negative state to a positive state, from an unhappy state to a happy state, or from a state of weakness to a state of strength, through the inspiration of holy beings such as our Spiritual Guide, Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Buddha’s bodies</span> A Buddha has four bodies – the Wisdom Truth Body, the Nature Body, the Enjoyment Body and the Emanation Body. The first is Buddha’s omniscient mind. The second is the emptiness, or ultimate nature, of his or her mind. The third is his subtle Form Body. The fourth, of which each Buddha manifests a countless number, are gross Form Bodies that are visible to ordinary beings. The Wisdom Truth Body and the Nature Body are both included within the Truth Body, and the Enjoyment Body and the Emanation Body are both included within the Form Body. See <span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span> and O<span class="_1---Italic">cean of Nectar</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Channel wheel</span> ‘Chakra’ in Sanskrit. A focal centre where secondary channels branch out from the central channel. Meditating on these points can cause the inner winds to enter the central channel. See <span class="_1---Italic">Modern Buddhism</span>, <span class="_1---Italic">Mahamudra Tantra</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Clear Light of Bliss</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Channels</span> Subtle inner passageways of the body through which flow subtle drops moved by inner winds. See <span class="_1---Italic">Modern Buddhism</span>, <span class="_1---Italic">Mahamudra Tantra</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Clear Light of Bliss</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Clear light</span> A manifest very subtle mind that perceives an appearance like clear, empty space. See <span class="_1---Italic">Modern Buddhism</span>, <span class="_1---Italic">Mahamudra Tantra</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Clear Light of Bliss</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Commitments</span> Promises and pledges taken when engaging in certain spiritual practices.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Concentration</span> A mental factor that makes its primary mind remain on its object single-pointedly. See <span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Meaningful to Behold</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Conceptual thought/mind</span> A thought that apprehends its object through a generic, or mental, image. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Contact</span> A mental factor that functions to perceive its object as pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Contentment</span> Being satisfied with one’s inner and outer conditions, motivated by a virtuous intention.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Degenerate times</span> A period when spiritual activity degenerates.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Deity</span> ‘Yidam’ in Tibetan. A Tantric enlightened being.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Desire realm</span> The environment of hell beings, hungry ghosts, animals, human beings, demi-gods, and the gods who enjoy the five objects of desire.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Dharma</span> Buddha’s teachings and the inner realizations that are attained in dependence upon practising them. ‘Dharma’ means ‘protection’. By practising Buddha’s teachings, we protect ourself from suffering and problems.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Direct perceiver</span> A cognizer that apprehends its object correctly and directly. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Discrimination</span> A mental factor that functions to apprehend the uncommon sign of an object. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Elements, four</span> Earth, water, fire and wind. These four elements are not the same as the earth of a field, the water of a river, and so forth. Rather, the elements of earth, water, fire and wind in broad terms are the properties of solidity, liquidity, heat and movement respectively.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Emanation</span> Animate or inanimate form manifested by Buddhas or high Bodhisattvas to benefit others.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Feeling</span> A mental factor that functions to experience pleasant, unpleasant or neutral objects. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Form Body</span> The Enjoyment Body and the Emanation Body of a Buddha. See also <span class="_1---Italic">Buddha’s bodies</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Formless realm</span> The environment of the gods who do not possess form. See <span class="_1---Italic">Ocean of Nectar</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Form realm</span> The environment of the gods who possess form and who are superior to desire realm gods. So-called because the gods who inhabit it have subtle form. See <span class="_1---Italic">Ocean of Nectar</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Functioning thing</span> A phenomenon that is produced and disintegrates within a moment. Synonymous with impermanent phenomenon, thing and product. See also <span class="_1---Italic">Impermanence</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Generic image</span> The appearing object of a conceptual mind. A generic image, or mental image, of an object is like a reflection of that object. Conceptual minds know their object through the appearance of a generic image of that object, not by seeing the object directly. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">The New Heart of Wisdom</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Geshe</span> A title given by Kadampa monasteries to accomplished Buddhist scholars. Contracted form of the Tibetan ‘ge wai she nyen’, literally meaning ‘virtuous friend’.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Geshe Chekhawa</span> (AD 1102-1176) A great Kadampa Bodhisattva who composed the text <span class="_1---Italic">Training the Mind in Seven Points</span>, a commentary to Langri Tangpa’s <span class="_1---Italic">Eight Verses of Training the Mind</span>. He spread the study and practice of training the mind throughout Tibet. See <span class="_1---Italic">Universal Compassion</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life</span> A classic Mahayana Buddhist text composed by the great Indian Buddhist Yogi and scholar Shantideva, which presents all the practices of a Bodhisattva from the initial generation of bodhichitta through to the completion of the practice of the six perfections. For a translation, see <span class="_1---Italic">Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life</span>; and for a full commentary, see <span class="_1---Italic">Meaningful to Behold</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Gungtang</span> Gungtang Konchog Tenpai Dronme (AD 1762-1823), a Gelug scholar and meditator famous for his spiritual poems and philosophical writings. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Guru</span> Sanskrit word for ‘Spiritual Guide’. See also<span class="_1---Italic"> Spiritual Guide</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Heart Sutra</span> One of several <span class="_1---Italic">Perfection of Wisdom Sutras</span> by Buddha. Although much shorter than the other <span class="_1---Italic">Perfection of Wisdom Sutras</span>, it contains explicitly or implicitly their entire meaning. For a translation and full commentary, see <span class="_1---Italic">The New Heart of Wisdom</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Heruka</span> A principal Deity of Mother Tantra, who is the embodiment of indivisible bliss and emptiness. See <span class="_1---Italic">Essence of Vajrayana</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Hinayana</span> Sanskrit word for ‘Lesser Vehicle’. The Hinayana goal is to attain merely one’s own liberation from suffering by completely abandoning delusions. See <span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Holy being</span> A being who is worthy of devotion.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Impermanence</span> Phenomena are either permanent or impermanent. ‘Impermanent’ means ‘momentary’, thus an impermanent phenomenon is a phenomenon that is produced and disintegrates within a moment. Synonyms of impermanent phenomenon are functioning thing, thing and product. There are two types of impermanence: gross and subtle. Gross impermanence is any impermanence that can be seen by a ordinary sense awareness – for example the ageing and death of a sentient being. Subtle impermanence is the momentary disintegration of a functioning thing. See <span class="_1---Italic">The New Heart of Wisdom</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Inner winds</span> Special subtle winds related to the mind that flow through the channels of our body. Our body and mind cannot function without these winds. See <span class="_1---Italic">Modern Buddhism</span>, <span class="_1---Italic">Mahamudra Tantra</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Clear Light of Bliss</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Intention</span> A mental factor that functions to focus its primary mind on an object. Its principal function is to create karma. Of the three types of karma, or action – bodily, verbal and mental – intention itself is mental action. However, it is also the cause of bodily and verbal actions, because all bodily and verbal actions are preceded by mental actions. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Je Tsongkhapa</span> (AD 1357-1419) An emanation of the Wisdom Buddha Manjushri, whose appearance in fourteenth-century Tibet as a monk, and the holder of the lineage of pure view and pure deeds, was prophesied by Buddha. He spread a very pure Buddhadharma throughout Tibet, showing how to combine the practices of Sutra and Tantra, and how to practise pure Dharma during degenerate times. His tradition later became known as the ‘Gelug’, or ‘Ganden Tradition’. See <span class="_1---Italic">Heart Jewel</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Great Treasury of Merit</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Kadampa</span> A Tibetan word in which ‘Ka’ means ‘word’ and refers to all Buddha’s teachings, ‘dam’ refers to Atisha’s special Lamrim instructions known as the ‘stages of the path to enlightenment’, and ‘pa’ refers to a follower of Kadampa Buddhism who integrates all the teachings of Buddha that they know into their Lamrim practice.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Kadampa Buddhism</span> A Mahayana Buddhist school founded by the great Indian Buddhist Master Atisha (AD 982-1054).</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Kadampa Geshe</span> See <span class="_1---Italic">Geshe</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Kadampa Tradition</span> The pure tradition of Buddhism established by Atisha. Followers of this tradition up to the time of Je Tsongkhapa are known as ‘Old Kadampas’, and those after the time of Je Tsongkhapa are known as ‘New Kadampas’.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Lama</span> See <span class="_1---Italic">Spiritual Guide</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Lamrim</span> A Tibetan term, literally meaning ‘stages of the path’. A  special arrangement of all Buddha’s teachings that is easy to understand and put into practice. It reveals all the stages of the path to enlightenment. For a full commentary, see <span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Langri Tangpa</span> (AD 1054-1123) A great Kadampa Geshe and Bodhisattva who was famous for his realization of exchanging self with others. He composed <span class="_1---Italic">Eight Verses of Training the Mind</span>. See <span class="_1---Italic">The New Eight Steps to Happiness</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Lineage</span> A line of instruction that has been passed down from Spiritual Guide to disciple, with each Spiritual Guide in the line having gained personal experience of the instruction before passing it on to others.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Living being</span> Synonymous with sentient being. Any being who possesses a mind that is contaminated by delusions or their imprints. Both ‘living being’ and ‘sentient being’ are terms used to distinguish beings whose minds are contaminated by either of these two obstructions from Buddhas, whose minds are completely free from these obstructions.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Lojong</span> See <span class="_1---Italic">Training the mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Lord of Death</span> Although the mara of uncontrolled death is not a living being, it is personified as the Lord of Death, or ‘Yama’. It is depicted in the diagram of the Wheel of Life clutching the wheel between its claws and teeth. See <span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Mahamudra</span> A Sanskrit word, literally meaning ‘great seal’. According to Sutra, this refers to the profound view of emptiness. Since emptiness is the nature of all phenomena, it is called a ‘seal’, and since a direct realization of emptiness enables us to accomplish the great purpose – complete liberation from the sufferings of samsara – it is also called ‘great’. According to Secret Mantra, great seal is the union of spontaneous great bliss and emptiness. See <span class="_1---Italic">Mahamudra Tantra</span>, <span class="_1---Italic">The Oral Instructions of Mahamudra</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Clear Light of Bliss</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Mahayana</span> Sanskrit word for ‘Great Vehicle’, the spiritual path to great enlightenment. The Mahayana goal is to attain Buddhahood for the benefit of all sentient beings by completely abandoning delusions and their imprints. See <span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Maitreya</span> The embodiment of the loving kindness of all the Buddhas. At the time of Buddha Shakyamuni, he manifested as a Bodhisattva disciple in order to show Buddha’s disciples how to be perfect Mahayana disciples. In the future, he will manifest as the fifth founding Buddha.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Mala</span> A rosary used to count recitations of prayers or mantras, usually with one hundred and eight beads.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Manjushri</span> The embodiment of the wisdom of all the Buddhas. See <span class="_1---Italic">Great Treasury of Merit</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Heart Jewel</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Mantra</span> A Sanskrit word, literally meaning ‘mind protection’. Mantra protects the mind from ordinary appearances and conceptions. See <span class="_1---Italic">Tantric Grounds and Paths</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Mara</span> Sanskrit for ‘demon’, and refers to anything that obstructs the attainment of liberation or enlightenment. There are four principal types of mara: the mara of the delusions, the mara of contaminated aggregates, the mara of uncontrolled death and the Devaputra maras. Of these, only the last are actual living beings. See <span class="_1---Italic">The New Heart of Wisdom</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Mental continuum</span> The continuum of a mind that has no beginning and no end.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Mental factor</span> A cognizer that principally apprehends a particular attribute of an object. There are fifty-one specific mental factors. Each moment of mind comprises a primary mind and various mental factors. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Mere appearance</span> All phenomena are mere appearance because they are imputed by mind in dependence upon a suitable basis of imputation appearing to mind. The word ‘mere’ excludes any possibility of inherent existence. See <span class="_1---Italic">Ocean of Nectar</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Merit</span> The good fortune created by virtuous actions. It is the potential power to increase our good qualities and produce happiness.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Milarepa</span> (AD 1040-1123) A great Tibetan Buddhist meditator and disciple of Marpa, celebrated for his beautiful songs of realization.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Mindfulness</span> A mental factor that functions not to forget the object realized by the primary mind. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Meaningful to Behold</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Nagarjuna</span> A great Indian Buddhist scholar and meditation master who revived the Mahayana in the first century AD by bringing to light the teachings on the <span class="_1---Italic">Perfection of Wisdom Sutras</span>. See <span class="_1---Italic">Ocean of Nectar</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">The New Heart of Wisdom</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Object of negation</span> An object explicitly negated by a mind realizing a negative phenomenon. In meditation on emptiness, or lack of inherent existence, it refers to inherent existence. Also known as ‘negated object’.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Observed object</span> Any object upon which the mind is focused. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Obstructions to liberation</span> Obstructions that prevent the attainment of liberation. All delusions, such as ignorance, attachment and anger, together with their seeds, are obstructions to liberation. Also called ‘delusion-obstructions’.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Obstructions to omniscience</span> The imprints of delusions, which prevent simultaneous and direct realization of all phenomena. Only Buddhas have overcome these obstructions.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Ordinary being</span> Anyone who has not realized emptiness directly.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Perfection of Wisdom Sutras</span> Sutras of the second turning of the Wheel of Dharma, in which Buddha revealed his final view of the ultimate nature of all phenomena – emptiness of inherent existence. See <span class="_1---Italic">The New Heart of Wisdom</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Ocean of Nectar</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Primary mind</span> A cognizer that principally apprehends the mere entity of an object. Synonymous with consciousness. There are six primary minds: eye consciousness, ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness and mental consciousness. Each moment of mind comprises a primary mind and various mental factors. A primary mind and its accompanying mental factors are the same entity but have different functions. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Pure Land</span> A pure environment in which there are no true sufferings. There are many Pure Lands. For example, Tushita is the Pure Land of Buddha Maitreya, Sukhavati is the Pure Land of Buddha Amitabha, and Dakini Land, or Keajra, is the Pure Land of Buddha Vajrayogini and Buddha Heruka. See <span class="_1---Italic">Living Meaningfully, Dying Joyfully</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Purification</span> Generally, any practice that leads to the attainment of a pure body, speech or mind. More specifically, a practice for purifying negative karma by means of the four opponent powers. See <span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">The Bodhisattva Vow</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Realization</span> A stable and non-mistaken experience of a virtuous object that directly protects us from suffering.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Refuge</span> Actual protection. To go for refuge to Buddha, Dharma and Sangha means to have faith in these Three Jewels and to rely upon them for protection from all fears and suffering. See <span class="_1---Italic">Modern Buddhism</span>, <span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Meaningful to Behold</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Root mind</span> The very subtle mind located at the centre of the heart channel wheel. It is known as the ‘root mind’ because all other minds arise from it and dissolve back into it. See <span class="_1---Italic">Mahamudra Tantra</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Secret Mantra</span> Synonymous with Tantra. Secret Mantra teachings are distinguished from Sutra teachings in that they reveal methods for training the mind by bringing the future result, or Buddhahood, into the present path. Secret Mantra is the supreme path to full enlightenment. The term ‘Mantra’ indicates that it is Buddha’s special instruction for protecting our mind from ordinary appearances and conceptions. Practitioners of Secret Mantra overcome ordinary appearances and conceptions by visualizing their body, environment, enjoyments and deeds as those of a Buddha. The term ‘Secret’ indicates that the practices are to be done in private, and that they can be practised only by those who have received a Tantric empowerment. See <span class="_1---Italic">Clear Light of Bliss</span>, <span class="_1---Italic">Mahamudra Tantra</span>, <span class="_1---Italic">Modern Buddhism</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Tantric Grounds and Paths</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Sentient being</span> See <span class="_1---Italic">Living being</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Shantideva</span> (AD 687-763) A great Indian Buddhist scholar and meditation master. He composed <span class="_1---Italic">Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life</span>. See <span class="_1---Italic">Meaningful to Behold</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Spiritual Guide</span> ‘Guru’ in Sanskrit, ‘Lama’ in Tibetan. A Teacher who guides us along the spiritual path. See <span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Great Treasury of Merit</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Stages of the path</span> See <span class="_1---Italic">Lamrim</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Subsequent cognizer</span> A completely reliable cognizer whose object is realized in direct dependence upon a conclusive reason. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Subtle impermanence</span> See <span class="_1---Italic">Impermanence</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Superior being</span> ‘Arya’ in Sanksrit. A being who has a direct realization of emptiness. There are Hinayana Superiors and Mahayana Superiors.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Superior seeing</span> A special wisdom that sees its object clearly, and that is maintained by tranquil abiding and the special suppleness that is induced by investigation. See<span class="_1---Italic"> Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Sutra</span> The teachings of Buddha that are open to everyone to practise without the need for empowerment. These include Buddha’s teachings of the three turnings of the Wheel of Dharma.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Tantra</span> See <span class="_1---Italic">Secret Mantra</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Training the mind</span> ‘Lojong’ in Tibetan. A special lineage of instructions that came from Buddha Shakyamuni through Manjushri and Shantideva to Atisha and the Kadampa Geshes, which emphasizes the generation of bodhichitta through the practices of equalizing and exchanging self with others combined with taking and giving. See <span class="_1---Italic">Universal Compassion</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">The New Eight Steps to Happiness</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Training the Mind in Seven Points</span> A commentary to <span class="_1---Italic">Eight Verses of Training the Mind</span>, composed by Geshe Chekhawa. For a full translation and commentary, see <span class="_1---Italic">Universal Compassion</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">True suffering</span> A contaminated object produced by delusions and karma. See <span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">How to Solve Our Human Problems</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Truth Body</span> ’Dharmakaya’ in Sanskrit. The Nature Body and the Wisdom Truth Body of a Buddha. See also <span class="_1---Italic">Buddha’s bodies</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Vajrayogini</span> A female Highest Yoga Tantra Deity who is the embodiment of indivisible bliss and emptiness. She is the same nature as Heruka. See <span class="_1---Italic">The New Guide to Dakini Land</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Valid cognizer/mind</span> A cognizer that is non-deceptive with respect to its engaged object. There are two types: subsequent valid cognizers and direct valid cognizers. See <span class="_1---Italic">How to Understand the Mind</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Very subtle mind</span> There are different levels of mind: gross, subtle and very subtle. Subtle minds manifest when the inner winds gather and dissolve within the central channel. See <span class="_1---Italic">Mahamudra Tantra</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Clear Light of Bliss</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Vinaya Sutras</span> Sutras in which Buddha principally explains the practice of moral discipline, and in particular the Pratimoksha moral discipline.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Vow</span> A virtuous determination to abandon particular faults that is generated in conjunction with a traditional ritual. The three sets of vows are the Pratimoksha vows of individual liberation, the Bodhisattva vows and the Secret Mantra vows. See <span class="_1---Italic">The Bodhisattva Vow</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Tantric Grounds and Paths</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Wisdom</span> A virtuous, intelligent mind that makes its primary mind realize a meaningful object. A wisdom is a spiritual path that functions to release our mind from delusions or their imprints. An example of wisdom is the correct view of emptiness.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Worldly concerns, eight</span> The objects of the eight worldly concerns are happiness and suffering, wealth and poverty, praise and criticism, and good reputation and bad reputation. These are called ‘worldly concerns’ because worldly people are constantly concerned with them, wanting some and trying to avoid others. See <span class="_1---Italic">Universal Compassion</span> and <span class="_1---Italic">Joyful Path of Good Fortune</span>.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_03-Glossary---entry _idGenParaOverride-1"><span class="_1---Bold-Italic">Yogi/Yogini</span> Sanskrit words usually referring to a male or a female meditator who has attained the union of tranquil abiding and superior seeing.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
