<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		<title>How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-21</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
		<link href="css/eBook_CSS_November2016.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-21" lang="en-GB" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<div>
			<p id="_idParaDest-21" class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_00-Chapter-title---TOC-Level-1"><a id="_idTextAnchor019"></a>Wishing Love</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para---full-space-below">In general, there are three types of <a id="_idIndexMarker1167"></a>love: affectionate love, <a id="_idIndexMarker1168"></a>cherishing love and <a id="_idIndexMarker1169"></a>wishing love. For example, when a mother looks at her children she feels great affection for them and perceives them to be beautiful, no matter how they appear to other people. Because of her <a id="_idIndexMarker1170"></a>affectionate love, she naturally feels them to be precious and important; this feeling is cherishing love. Because she cherishes her children, she sincerely wishes for them to be happy; this wish is wishing love. Wishing love arises from cherishing love, which in turn arises from affectionate love. We need to develop these three types of love towards all living beings without exception.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---heading-1">HOW TO DEVELOP WISHING LOVE FOR ALL LIVING BEINGS</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">Having developed experience of cherishing love for all living beings through practising the previous instructions, if we contemplate how living beings lack pure happiness we will naturally develop a sincere wish to lead all living beings to a state of pure happiness. This is universal wishing love. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">What is pure <a id="_idIndexMarker1171"></a>happiness? Pure happiness is happiness that comes from a peaceful mind. The happiness that comes from <a id="_idIndexMarker1172"></a>worldly enjoyments such as eating, drinking, sex and relaxing is not pure or real happiness. It is <a id="_idIndexMarker1173"></a>changing suffering, or just a reduction of our previous suffering. Through training we can develop and maintain peace of mind all the time, so that we will be happy all the time. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">In <span class="_1---Italic">Four Hundred Verses</span><a id="_idIndexMarker1174"></a> the great scholar Aryadeva<a id="_idIndexMarker1175"></a> says:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">The experience of suffering will never be changed by the same cause,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">But we can see the experience of happiness will be changed by the same cause.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">This means that, for example, the suffering caused by fire will never be changed into happiness by that fire, but we can see that the happiness caused, for example, by eating will change into suffering just through eating. How can we understand this? When we eat our favourite food, it tastes wonderful, but if we were to continue plateful after plateful our happiness would soon change into discomfort, disgust and eventually pain. This proves that the experience of happiness will be changed into suffering by the same cause. From eating comes happiness, but also the suffering of sickness. This shows that worldly enjoyments such as eating are not real causes of happiness, and this implies that the pleasure that comes from worldly enjoyments is not real happiness. The reverse, however, does not happen with painful experiences. For instance, hitting our finger with a hammer again and again can never become pleasurable, because it is a true cause of suffering. Just as a true cause of suffering can never give rise to happiness, so a true cause of happiness can never give rise to pain. Since the pleasurable feelings resulting from worldly enjoyments do turn into pain, it follows that they cannot be real happiness. Prolonged indulgence in eating, sport, sex or any other ordinary enjoyment invariably leads to <a id="_idIndexMarker1176"></a>suffering. No matter how hard we try to find happiness in worldly pleasures, we will never succeed. As mentioned earlier, indulging in samsaric pleasures is like drinking <a id="_idIndexMarker1177"></a>salt water; rather than satiating our thirst, the more we drink the more thirsty we become. In samsara we never reach a point when we can say, ‘Now I am completely satisfied; I need nothing more.’</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">Not only is worldly pleasure not true happiness, but it also does not last. People devote their lives to acquiring possessions and social standing, and building up a home, a family and a circle of friends; but when they die they lose everything. All they have worked for suddenly disappears, and they enter their next life alone and empty-handed. They long to form deep and lasting friendships with others, but in samsara this is impossible. The dearest lovers will eventually be torn apart, and when they meet again in a future life they will not recognize each other. We may feel that those who have good <a id="_idIndexMarker1178"></a>relationships and have fulfilled their ambitions in life are truly happy, but in reality their happiness is as fragile as a water bubble. <a id="_idIndexMarker1179"></a>Impermanence spares nothing and no one; in samsara all our dreams are broken in the end. As <a id="_idIndexMarker1180"></a>Buddha says in the <a id="_idIndexMarker1181"></a><span class="_1---Italic">Vinaya Sutras</span>:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">The end of collection is dispersion.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">The end of rising is falling.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">The end of meeting is parting.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">The end of birth is death.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">The nature of <a id="_idIndexMarker1182"></a>samsara, the cycle of impure life, is suffering. In this impure life we will never experience pure <a id="_idIndexMarker1183"></a>happiness unless we engage in pure <a id="_idIndexMarker1184"></a>spiritual practice. Buddha compared living in samsara to sitting on top of a pin – no matter how much we try to adjust our position it is always painful, and no matter how hard we try to adjust and improve our samsaric situation it will always irritate us and give rise to pain.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para"><a id="_idIndexMarker1185"></a>Pure happiness comes from wisdom, which in turn comes from practising pure spiritual teachings, known as ‘<a id="_idIndexMarker1186"></a>Dharma’. Each and every spiritual practice presented in this book gives us the ability to develop and maintain peace of mind. This inner peace is pure happiness because it comes from wisdom, not from worldly enjoyments. If we have deep knowledge understanding the great benefits of pure spiritual practice, which is <a id="_idIndexMarker1187"></a>wisdom, we will definitely engage in pure spiritual practice. Without this wisdom we will never do this, and so wisdom is the source of all pure spiritual practices. Without wisdom we are like a person who has no eyes who cannot see anything. Similarly, without wisdom we cannot understand meaningful objects. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---space-below">The meaning of pure spiritual practice has previously been explained in the chapter on death. What is wisdom? Wisdom is a deep knowledge that understands meaningful objects. All the objects of meditation presented in this book are <a id="_idIndexMarker1188"></a>meaningful objects because the knowledge that understands these objects gives us great meaning in this life and in countless future lives. There are many levels of pure <a id="_idIndexMarker1189"></a>happiness. Of these the supreme is the happiness of <a id="_idIndexMarker1190"></a>enlightenment. For this reason, in this practice of developing wishing love for all living beings, we generate the object of <a id="_idIndexMarker1191"></a>meditation by making a strong determination to lead all living beings to the pure happiness of enlightenment. We do this by engaging in the following contemplation. Cherishing all living beings, from the depths of our heart, we should think:</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---meditation---single">Although all living beings, who are drowning in the <a id="_idIndexMarker1192"></a>deep ocean of suffering, are looking for happiness all the time none of them finds real happiness. I must lead them to the pure happiness of enlightenment.  </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---1st-para">We meditate on this determination again and again until we develop a spontaneous wish to lead all living beings to the supreme happiness of enlightenment. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">The term ‘<a id="_idIndexMarker1193"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1194"></a>ocean of suffering’ has great significance. The ocean of suffering is very different from an ordinary ocean. Each and every part of an ordinary ocean is the nature of water, but each and every part of the ocean of suffering is the nature of suffering. An ordinary ocean has an end, but the ocean of suffering is endless. All living beings are drowning in this endless ocean of suffering; although they are all looking for happiness day and night, in the ocean of suffering there is no happiness at all. Through thinking and contemplating this we generate wishing love, sincerely wishing to lead all living beings to the pure happiness of enlightenment. Although we normally use the term ‘ocean of <a id="_idIndexMarker1195"></a>samsara’, if instead we sometimes use the term ‘ocean of suffering’ it will powerfully touch our hearts. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Meditation on <a id="_idIndexMarker1196"></a>love is very powerful. Wishing love is also called ‘<a id="_idIndexMarker1197"></a>immeasurable love’ because merely through meditating on wishing love we will receive immeasurable benefits in this life and in countless future lives, even if our concentration is not very strong. Based on Buddha’s teachings, the great scholar Nagarjuna<a id="_idIndexMarker1198"></a> listed eight benefits of affectionate love<a id="_idIndexMarker1199"></a> and wishing love: (1) By meditating on affectionate love and wishing love for just one moment we accumulate greater merit, or good fortune, than we would do by giving food three times every day to all those who are hungry in the world. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">When we give food to those who are hungry we are not giving real happiness. This is because the happiness that comes from eating food is not real happiness, but just a temporary reduction of the <a id="_idIndexMarker1200"></a>suffering of hunger. However, meditation on affectionate love and wishing love leads us and all living beings to the pure and everlasting happiness of enlightenment. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">The remaining seven benefits of meditating on affectionate love and wishing love are that in the future: (2) we will receive great loving kindness<a id="_idIndexMarker1201"></a> from humans and non-humans; (3) we will be protected in various ways by humans and non-humans; (4) we will be mentally happy all the time; (5) we will be physically healthy all the time; (6) we will not be harmed by weapons, poison and other harmful conditions; (7) we will obtain all necessary conditions without effort; and (8) we will be born in the superior heaven of a <a id="_idIndexMarker1202"></a>Buddha Land.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Having contemplated these benefits we should apply effort in meditating on wishing love many times every day. </p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para">Love is the great protector, <a id="_idIndexMarker1203"></a>protecting us from anger and jealousy and from harm inflicted by <a id="_idIndexMarker1204"></a>spirits. When Buddha <a id="_idIndexMarker1205"></a>Shakyamuni was meditating under the <a id="_idIndexMarker1206"></a>Bodhi Tree, he was attacked by all the terrifying <a id="_idIndexMarker1207"></a>demons of this world, but his love transformed their weapons into a rain of flowers. Ultimately our love will become the universal <a id="_idIndexMarker1208"></a>love of a Buddha, which actually has the power to bestow happiness on all living beings.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---2nd-para---full-space-below _idGenParaOverride-1">Most relationships between people are based on a mixture of love and <a id="_idIndexMarker1209"></a>attachment. This is not pure <a id="_idIndexMarker1210"></a><a id="_idIndexMarker1211"></a>love for it is based on a desire for our own happiness – we value the other person because they make us feel good. Pure love is unmixed with attachment and stems entirely from a concern for others’ happiness. It never gives rise to problems but only to peace and happiness for both ourself and others. We need to remove attachment from our minds, but this does not mean that we have to abandon our relationships. Rather, we should learn to distinguish attachment from love, and gradually try to remove all traces of attachment from our relationships and to improve our love until it becomes pure.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
