<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		<title>How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-31</title>
		<link href="css/idGeneratedStyles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
		<link href="css/eBook_CSS_November2016.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="How_to_Transform_Your_Life_text_2016-07-31" lang="en-GB" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<div>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_00-Chapter-title---TOC-Level-2">The <a id="_idIndexMarker1952"></a>Three Principal Aspects of the Path</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">Homage to the venerable Spiritual Guide.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">I will explain to the best of my ability</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">The essential meaning of all the Conqueror’s teachings,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">The path praised by the holy Bodhisattvas,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">And the gateway for fortunate ones seeking liberation.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">You who are not attached to the joys of samsara,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But strive to make your freedom and endowment meaningful,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">O Fortunate Ones who apply your minds to the path that pleases the Conquerors,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">Please listen with a clear mind.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Without pure renunciation, there is no way to pacify</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Attachment to the pleasures of samsara;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">And since living beings are tightly bound by desire for samsara,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">Begin by seeking renunciation.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Freedom and endowment are difficult to find, and there is no time to waste.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">By acquainting your mind with this, overcome attachment to this life;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">And by repeatedly contemplating actions and effects</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">And the sufferings of samsara, overcome attachment to future lives.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">When, through contemplating in this way, the desire for the pleasures of samsara</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Does not arise, even for a moment,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But a mind longing for liberation arises throughout the day and the night,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">At that time, renunciation is generated.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">However, if this renunciation is not maintained</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">By completely pure bodhichitta,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">It will not be a cause of the perfect happiness of unsurpassed enlightenment;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">Therefore, the wise generate a supreme bodhichitta.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Swept along by the currents of the four powerful rivers,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Tightly bound by the chains of karma, so hard to release,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Ensnared within the iron net of self-grasping,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">Completely enveloped by the pitch-black darkness of ignorance,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Taking rebirth after rebirth in boundless samsara,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">And unceasingly tormented by the three sufferings –</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Through contemplating the state of your mothers in conditions such as these,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">Generate a supreme mind [of bodhichitta].</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">But, even though you may be acquainted with renunciation and bodhichitta,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">If you do not possess the wisdom realizing the way things are,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">You will not be able to cut the root of samsara;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">Therefore, strive in the means for realizing dependent relationship.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Whoever negates the conceived object of self-grasping</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Yet sees the infallibility of cause and effect</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Of all phenomena in samsara and nirvana,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">Has entered the path that pleases the Buddhas.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Dependent-related appearance is infallible</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">And emptiness is inexpressible;</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">For as long as the meaning of these two appear to be separate,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">You have not yet realized Buddha’s intention.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">When they arise as one, not alternating but simultaneous,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">From merely seeing infallible dependent relationship</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Comes certain knowledge that destroys all grasping at objects.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">At that time, the analysis of view is complete.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Moreover, when the extreme of existence is dispelled by appearance,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">And the extreme of non-existence is dispelled by emptiness,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">And you know how emptiness is perceived as cause and effect,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last">You will not be captivated by extreme views.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">When, in this way, you have correctly realized the essential points</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Of the three principal aspects of the path,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---middle">Dear One, withdraw into solitude, generate strong effort,</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_01-Text---quotation---verse---last-full-space-below">And quickly accomplish the final goal.</p>
			<p class="Tharpa-Book-Styles_02-Sadhana---colophon _idGenParaOverride-1"><span class="_1---Bold">Colophon: </span>Both texts were translated under the compassionate guidance of Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
